 
THE CIVIL CODE OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION 
(Parts One, Two and Three) 
(with the Additions and Amendments of February 20, August 12, 1996, 
October 24, 1997, July 8, December 17, 1999, April 16, May 15, 
November 26, 2001, March 21, November 14, 26, 2002, January 10, 
March 26, November 11, December 23, 2003, June 29, July 29, 
December 2, 29, 30, 2004, March 21, May 9, July 2, 18, 
21, 2005) 
 
On certain questions, related to the application of Part One of the Civil Code of the Russian 
Federation see Decision of the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation and of 
the Plenary Session of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 6/8 of July 1, 1996 
 
Part One 
 
 
Section I. The General Provisions                     (Articles 1-208)   
  Subsection 1. The Basic Provisions                  (Articles 1-16)    
     Chapter 1. The Civil Legislation                 (Articles 1-7)     
     Chapter 2. Arising of the  Civil  Rights and     (Articles 8-16)    
                Duties, Exercising and Protection                        
                of the Civil Rights                                      
  Subsection 2. The Persons                           (Articles 17-127)  
     Chapter 3. The Citizens (Natural Persons)        (Articles 17-47)   
     Chapter 4. The Legal Entities                    (Articles 48-123)  
           _ 1. The Basic Provisions                  (Articles 48-65)   
           _ 2. The Economic Partnerships and Co-     (Articles 66-106)  
                mpanies                                                  
             1. The General Provisions                (Articles 66-68)   
             2. The General Partnership               (Articles 69-81)   
             3. The Limited Partnership               (Articles 82-86)   
             4. The Limited Liability Company         (Articles 87-94)   
             5. The Double Liability Company          (Article 95)       
             6. The Joint-Stock Company               (Articles 96-104)  
             7. The Subsidiary and Dependent Co-      (Articles 105-106) 
                mpanies                                                  
           _ 3. The Production Cooperatives           (Articles 107-112) 
           _ 4. The State-Run and Municipal           (Articles 113-115) 
                Unitary Enterprises                                      
           _ 5. The Non-Profit Organizations          (Articles 116-123) 
     Chapter 5. Participation of the Russian Fede-    (Articles 124-127) 
                ration,  of  the Subjects  of the                        
                Russian Federation and of the  Mu-                       
                nicipal Entities in the  Relation-                       
                ships, Regulated by the Civil  Le-                       
                gislation                                                
  Subsection 3. The Objects of Civil Rights           (Articles 128-152) 
     Chapter 6. The General Provisions                (Articles 128-141) 
     Chapter 7. The Securities                        (Articles 142-149) 
     Chapter 8. The Non-Material Values and Their     (Articles 150-152) 
                Protection                                               
  Subsection 4. The Deals and the Representation      (Articles 153-189) 
     Chapter 9. The Deals                             (Articles 153-181) 
           _ 1. The Concept, the  Kinds  and the      (Articles 153-165) 
                Form of the Deals                                        
           _ 2. The Invalidity of the Deals           (Articles 166-181) 
    Chapter 10. The Representation. The Warrant       (Articles 182-189) 
  Subsection 5. The Term. The Limitation of Actions   (Articles 190-208) 
    Chapter 11. The Counting of the Term              (Articles 190-194) 
    Chapter 12. The Limitation of Actions             (Articles 195-208) 
Section II. The Right of Ownership and  the Other     (Articles 209-306) 
            Rights of Estate                                             
    Chapter 13. The General Provisions                (Articles 209-217) 
    Chapter 14. The Acquisition of the Right  of      (Articles 218-234) 
                Ownership                                                
    Chapter 15. The Cessation of the Right of Ow-     (Articles 235-243) 
                nership                                                  
    Chapter 16. The Common Property                   (Articles 244-259) 
    Chapter 17. The Right of  Ownership  and  the     (Articles 260-287) 
                Other Rights of Estate to the Land                       
    Chapter 18. The Right  of  Ownership  and the     (Articles 288-293) 
                Other Rights of Estate to the Li-                        
                ving Quarters                                            
    Chapter 19. The Right  of Economic Management     (Articles 294-300) 
                and  the Right of Operation Mana-                        
                gement                                                   
    Chapter 20. Protection of the Right of Ownership  (Articles 301-306) 
                and of the Other Rights of Estate                        
Section III. The General Part of the Law of Obliga-   (Articles 307-453) 
             tion                                                        
  Subsection 1. The General Provisions on Obligati-   (Articles 307-419) 
                ons                                                      
    Chapter 21. The Concept and the Aspects of an     (Articles 307-308) 
                Obligation                                               
    Chapter 22. The Discharge of Obligations          (Articles 309-328) 
    Chapter 23. Providing  for the  Discharge  of     (Articles 329-381) 
                Obligations                                              
           _ 1. The General Provisions                (Article 329)      
           _ 2. The Forfeit                           (Articles 330-333) 
           _ 3. The Pledge                            (Articles 334-358) 
           _ 4. The Retention                         (Articles 359-360) 
           _ 5. The Surety                            (Articles 361-367) 
           _ 6. The Bank Guarantee                    (Articles 368-379) 
           _ 7. The Advance                           (Articles 380-381) 
    Chapter 24. The Substitution of Persons in an     (Articles 382-392) 
                Obligation                                               
           _ 1. The Transfer  of  the  Creditor's     (Articles 382-390) 
                Rights to Another Person                                 
           _ 2. The Transfer of the Debt              (Articles 391-392) 
    Chapter 25. Responsibility for the Violation      (Articles 393-406) 
                of Obligations                                           
    Chapter 26. The Termination of Obligations        (Articles 407-419) 
  Subsection 2. The General Provisions on the Co-     (Articles 420-453) 
                ntract                                                   
    Chapter 27. The Concept and the Terms of the      (Articles 420-431) 
                Contract                                                 
    Chapter 28. The Conclusion of the Contract        (Articles 432-449) 
    Chapter 29. The Amendment and the Cancellation    (Articles 450-453) 
                of the Contract                                          
 
                               Part Two 
 
 
Section IV. Particular Kinds of Obligations           (Articles 454-1109) 
    Chapter 30. Purchase and Sale                     (Articles 454-566) 
           _ 1. General Provisions on Purchase and    (Articles 454-491) 
                Sale                                                     
           _ 2. Retail Sale                           (Articles 492-505) 
           _ 3. Delivery of Goods                     (Articles 506-524) 
           _ 4. Delivery of Goods for State Needs     (Articles 525-534) 
           _ 5. Sale of Agricultural Produce          (Articles 535-538) 
           _ 6. Power Supply                          (Articles 539-548) 
           _ 7. The Sale of Real Estate               (Articles 549-558) 
           _ 8. The Sale of Enterprises               (Articles 559-566) 
    Chapter 31. Barter                                (Articles 567-571) 
    Chapter 32. Donation                              (Articles 572-582) 
    Chapter 33. Rent and Life Maintenance with De-    (Articles 583-605) 
                pendence                                                 
           _ 1. General Provisions on Rent and Life   (Articles 583-588) 
                Maintenance with Dependence                              
           _ 2. Permanent Rent                        (Articles 589-595) 
           _ 3. Life Annuity                          (Articles 596-600) 
           _ 4. Life Maintenance with Dependency      (Articles 601-605) 
    Chapter 34. Lease                                 (Articles 606-670) 
           _ 1. General Provisions on Lease           (Articles 606-625) 
           _ 2. Hire                                  (Articles 626-631) 
           _ 3. Lease of Transport Vehicles           (Articles 632-649) 
             1. Lease of a Transport Vehicle  with    (Articles 632-641) 
                the Provision of Services for Dri-                       
                ving and Technical Operation                             
             2. The  Lease  of a Transport Vehicle    (Articles 642-649) 
                Without Driving and Technical Ope-                       
                ration Services                                          
           _ 4. The  Lease of Buildings and Struc-    (Articles 650-655) 
                tures                                                    
           _ 5. The Lease of Enterprises              (Articles 656-664) 
           _ 6. Financial Lease (Leasing)             (Articles 665-670) 
    Chapter 35. The Renting of Living Accommodation   (Articles 671-688) 
    Chapter 36. Gratuitous Use                        (Articles 689-701) 
    Chapter 37. Contract of Hiring Work               (Articles 702-768) 
           _ 1. General Provisions on  Contract of    (Articles 702-729) 
                Hiring Work                                              
           _ 2. The Domestic Contract                 (Articles 730-739) 
           _ 3. The Building Contract                 (Articles 740-757) 
           _ 4. Contract   for  Design and  Survey    (Articles 758-762) 
                Works                                                    
           _ 5. Contract Works for State Needs        (Articles 763-768) 
    Chapter 38. Performance of Research and  Deve-    (Articles 769-778) 
                lopment and Technological Works                          
    Chapter 39. The Repayable Rendering of Services   (Articles 779-783) 
    Chapter 40. Carriage                              (Articles 784-800) 
    Chapter 41. Transport Forwarding                  (Articles 801-806) 
    Chapter 42. Loans and Credits                     (Articles 807-833) 
           _ 1. Loans                                 (Articles 807-818) 
           _ 2. Credit                                (Articles 819-821) 
           _ 3. Credit  Against Goods and  Commer-    (Articles 822-823) 
                cial Credit                                              
    Chapter 43. Financing Against the Assignment of   (Articles 824-833) 
                a Monetary Claim                                         
    Chapter 44. Bank Deposit                          (Articles 834-844) 
    Chapter 45. Bank Account                          (Articles 845-860) 
    Chapter 46. Payments                              (Articles 861-885) 
           _ 1. General Provisions on Payments        (Articles 861-862) 
           _ 2. Payments by Written Order             (Articles 863-866) 
           _ 3. Payments by Letters of Credit         (Articles 867-873) 
           _ 4. Payments for Collection               (Articles 874-876) 
           _ 5. Payments by Cheques                   (Articles 877-885) 
    Chapter 47. Storage                               (Articles 886-926) 
           _ 1. General Provisions on Storage         (Articles 886-906) 
           _ 2. Warehousing                           (Articles 907-918) 
           _ 3. Special Kinds of Storage              (Articles 919-926) 
    Chapter 48. Insurance                             (Articles 927-970) 
    Chapter 49. Agency                                (Articles 971-979) 
    Chapter 50. Actions in the Interest  of  Other    (Articles 980-989) 
                People Without Commission                                
    Chapter 51. Commission                            (Articles 990-1004) 
    Chapter 52. Agency Service                        (Articles 1005-1011) 
    Chapter 53. Trust of Estate                       (Articles 1012-1026) 
    Chapter 54. The Commercial Concession             (Articles 1027-1040) 
    Chapter 55. Particular Partnership                (Articles 1041-1054) 
    Chapter 56. Public Promise of a Reward            (Articles 1055-1056) 
    Chapter 57. Public Competition                    (Articles 1057-1061) 
    Chapter 58. Gaming and Betting                    (Articles 1062-1063) 
    Chapter 59. Liabilities for Damage                (Articles 1064-1101) 
           _ 1. General Provisions in the  Redress    (Articles 1064-1083) 
                of Injury                                                
           _ 2. The Redress of the Injury Inflicted   (Articles 1084-1094) 
                on the Life or Health of an Indivi-                      
                dual                                                     
           _ 3. The Redress of the Injury Inflicted   (Articles 1095-1098) 
                by Defects in Goods, Works or Ser-                       
                vices                                                    
           _ 4. Compensation for the Moral Damage     (Articles 1099-1101) 
    Chapter 60. Obligations Due to Unjust Enrichment  (Articles 1102-1109) 
 
                          Part Three                                      
 
 
Section V. Law of Succession                          (Articles 1110-1185) 
    Chapter 61. General   Provisions   Governing                           
                Succession                                                 
    Chapter 62. Succession by Will                    (Articles 1110-1117) 
    Chapter 63. Succession by Operation of  Law       (Articles 1110-1117) 
    Chapter 64. Acquisition of Inheritance            (Articles 1118-1140) 
    Chapter 65. Succession of Specific Types of       (Articles 1110-1117) 
                Assets                                                     
Section VI. International Private Law                 (Articles 1186-1224) 
    Chapter 66. General Provisions                    (Articles 1186-1194) 
    Chapter 67. The Law Governing Determination       (Articles 1195-1204) 
                of the Legal Status of Persons                             
    Chapter 68. The  Law  Governing Proprietary       (Articles 1205-1224) 
                and  Personal   Non-Proprietary                            
                Relations                                                  
 
The Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 52-FZ of November 30, 1994 
on Putting in Force Part One of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation 
 
The Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 15-FZ of January  26, 1996 
on Putting in Force Part Two of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation 
Federal  Law No. 147-FZ of  the Russian  Federation of November 26, 2001  
on Putting Into Force Part 3 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation  
Part One 
Section I. The General Provisions 
Subsection 1. The Basic Provisions 
Chapter 1. The Civil Legislation 
Article 1. Chief Principles of the Civil Legislation 
1. The civil legislation shall be based on recognizing the equality of participants in the relationships 
regulated by it, the inviolability of property, the freedom of agreement, the inadmissibly of anybody's 
arbitrary interference into the private affairs, the necessity to freely exercise the civil rights, the guarantee 
of the reinstatement of the civil rights in case of their violation, and their protection in the court. 
2. The citizens (natural persons) and the legal entities shall acquire and exercise their civil rights of 
their own free will and in their own interest. They shall be free to establish their rights and duties on the 
basis of an agreement and to define any terms of the agreement, which are not in contradiction with 
legislation. 
The civil rights may be restricted on the basis of the Federal Law and only to the extent, to which it 
shall be necessary for the purposes of protecting the foundations of the constitutional system, morality, 
the health, the rights and the lawful interests of other persons, of providing for the defence of the country 
and for the state security. 
3. The commodities, services and financial means shall move unhindered throughout the entire 
territory of the Russian Federation. Restrictions on the movement of commodities and services shall be 
imposed in conformity with the Federal Law, if this is necessary to provide for security, and to protect the 
human life and health, the environment and the cultural benefits. 
Article 2. Relations Regulated by the Civil Legislation 
1. The civil legislation shall define the legal status of the participants in the civil turnover, the 
grounds for the emergence and the order of exercising the right of ownership and the other rights of 
estate, the exclusive right to the results of the intellectual activity (intellectual property); it shall regulate 
the contractual and other obligations, as well as the other property and personal non-property relations 
related to the former, based on the equality, the autonomous will and the property independence of their 
participants. 
Both the citizens and the legal entities may be the participants of the relations, regulated by the civil 
legislation. The Russian Federation, the subjects of the Russian Federation and the municipal entities may 
also participate in the relations, regulated by the civil legislation (Article 124). 
The civil legislation shall regulate relations between the persons, engaged in business activities or in 
those performed with their participation, proceeding from the fact that the business activity shall be an 
independent activity, performed at one's own risk, aimed at systematically deriving a profit from the use 
of the property, the sale of commodities, the performance of work or the rendering of services by the 
persons, registered in this capacity in conformity with the law-established procedure. 
The rules, laid down by the civil legislation, shall be applied toward relations with the participation 
of foreign citizens, of persons without any citizenship, and also of foreign legal entities, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the Federal Law. 
2. The inalienable human rights and freedoms, and the other non-material values shall be protected 
by the civil legislation, unless otherwise following from the substance of these non-material values. 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by legislation, the civil legislation shall not be applied toward the 
property relations, based on the administrative or the other kind of authoritative subordination of one 
party to the other party, including toward the taxation and other financial or administrative relations. 
Article 3. The Civil Legislation and the Other Acts, Containing the Civil 
Legislation Norms 
1. In conformity with the Constitution of the Russian Federation, the civil legislation shall be within 
the jurisdiction of the Russian Federation. 
2. The civil legislation shall be comprised of the present Code and of the federal laws (hereinafter 
referred to as the laws), adopted in conformity with it, which regulate the relations, indicated in Items 1 
and 2 of Article 2 of the present Code. 
The norms of the civil legislation, contained in the other laws, shall correspond to the present Code. 
3. The relations, indicated in Items 1 and 2 of Article 2 of the present Code, shall also be regulated 
by the Decrees of the President of the Russian Federation, which shall not be in contradiction with the 
present Code and with the other laws. 
4. On the grounds and in execution of the present Code and of the other laws, and of the Decrees of 
the President of the Russian Federation, the Government of the Russian Federation shall have the right to 
adopt decisions, containing the norms of the civil law. 
5. If the Decree of the President of the Russian Federation or the decision of the Government of the 
Russian Federation proves to be in contradiction with the present Code or with the other law, the present 
Code or the corresponding law shall be applied. 
6. The operation and implementation of the norms of the civil law, contained in the Decrees of the 
President of the Russian Federation and in the decisions of the Government of the Russian Federation 
(hereinafter referred to as the other legal acts), shall be defined by the rules of the present chapter. 
7. The ministries and the other federal executive power bodies may issue the acts, containing the 
norms of the civil law, in the cases and within the limits, stipulated by the present Code, by the other laws 
and by the other legal acts. 
Article 4. Operation of the Civil Legislation in Time 
1. The acts of the civil legislation shall not be retroactive and shall be applied toward the relations, 
which have arisen after they have been put in force. 
The operation of the law shall be extended toward the relations, which have arisen before it has been 
put in force, only in the cases, directly stipulated by law. 
2. Concerning the relations, which have arisen before the civil legislation act has been put in force, 
it shall be applied toward the rights and duties, which have arisen after its being put in force. The relations 
of the parties by the agreement, signed before the civil legislation act has been enforced, shall be 
regulated in conformity with Article 422 of the present Code. 
Article 5. The Customs of the Business Turnover 
1. The custom of the business turnover shall be recognized as the rule of behavior, which has taken 
shape and is widely applied in a certain sphere of business activities, and which has not been stipulated by 
legislation, regardless of whether it has or has not been fixed in any one document. 
2. The customs of the business turnover, contradicting to the provisions of legislation or to the 
agreement, obligatory for the participant in the given relationship, shall not be applied. 
Article 6. Application of the Civil Legislation by Analogy 
1. In cases when the relations, stipulated in Items 1 and 2 of Article 2 of the present Code are not 
directly regulated by legislation or by an agreement between the parties, while the custom of the business 
turnover that would be applicable to them does not exist, and if this is not in contradiction with their 
substance, the civil legislation shall be applied, which regulates similar relations (the analogy of the law). 
2. If it is impossible to apply the similar law, the rights and duties of the parties shall be defined, 
proceeding from the general principles and the meaning of the civil legislation (the analogy of the right), 
and also from the requirements of honesty, wisdom and justice. 
Article 7. The Civil Legislation and the Norms of International Law 
1. The generally recognized principles and norms of international law and the international treaties 
of the Russian Federation, shall be, in conformity with the Constitution of the Russian Federation, a 
component part of the legal system of the Russian Federation. 
2. The international treaties of the Russian Federation shall be directly applied toward the relations, 
indicated in Items 1 and 2 of Article 2 of the present Code, with the exception of the cases, when it 
follows from the international treaty that for it to be applied, a special intra-state act shall be issued. 
If the rules, laid down in the international treaty of the Russian Federation, differ from those 
stipulated by the civil legislation, the rules of the international treaty shall be applied. 
Chapter 2. Arising of the Civil Rights and Duties, the Exercising  
and Protection of the Civil Rights 
Article 8. The Grounds for the Arising of the Civil Rights and Duties 
1. The civil rights and duties shall arise from the grounds, stipulated by the law and by the other 
legal acts, as well as from the actions of the citizens and of the legal entities, which, though not stipulated 
by the law or by such acts, still generate, by force of the general principles and of the meaning of the civil 
legislation, the civil rights and duties. In conformity with this, the civil rights and duties shall arise: 
1) from the law-stipulated contracts and other deals, and also from the contracts and other deals, 
which, though not stipulated by the law, are not in contradiction with it; 
2) from the acts of the state bodies and of the local self-government bodies, which are stipulated by 
the law as the grounds for the arising of the civil rights and duties; 
3) from the court ruling, which has established the civil rights and duties; 
4) as a result of the acquisition of property on the grounds, admitted by the law; 
5) as a result of creating the works of science, literature and art, of making inventions and producing 
other results of the intellectual activity; 
6) as a result of inflicting damage to another person; 
7) as a consequence of an unjust enrichment; 
8) because of other actions performed by the citizens and the legal entities; 
9) as a result of the events, with which the law or the other legal act connects the arising of the civil 
legislation consequences. 
2. The rights to the property, liable to the state registration, shall arise from the moment of the 
registration of the corresponding rights to it, unless otherwise stipulated by the law. 
Article 9. Exercising of the Civil Rights 
1. The citizens and the legal entities shall exercise the civil rights they possess at their own 
discretion. 
2. The refusal of the citizens and of the legal entities to exercise the civil rights they possess shall 
not entail the termination of these rights, with the exception of the law-stipulated cases. 
Article 10. The Limits of Exercising the Civil Rights 
1. Not admissible shall be actions by the citizens and the legal entities, performed with the express 
purpose of inflicting damage to another person, as well as the abuse of the civil rights in other forms. 
Not admissible shall also be the use of the civil rights for the purpose of restricting the competition, 
as well as the abuse of the dominating position on the market. 
2. In case of the person not abiding by the requirements, stipulated in Item 1 of the present Article, 
the court of justice, the arbitration court or the arbitration tribunal shall have the right to reject this 
person's claim for the protection of the right he possesses. 
3. In the cases when the law makes the protection of the civil rights dependent on whether these 
rights have been exercised in wisdom and honesty, the wisdom of actions and the honesty of the 
participants in the civil legal relations shall be presumed. 
Article 11. Protection of the Civil Rights in the Court 
1. The violated or disputed civil rights shall be protected by the court of justice, the arbitration court 
or the arbitration tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the court), in conformity with the liability of the cases 
to these bodies' jurisdiction, established by the procedural legislation. 
2. Protection of the civil rights in the administrative order shall be effected only in the law-stipulated 
cases. The decision, adopted administratively, may be appealed against in the court. 
Article 12. The Ways of Protecting the Civil Rights 
The civil rights shall be protected by way of: - the recognition of the right; - the restoration of the situation, which existed before the given right was violated, and the 
suppression of the actions that violate the right or create the threat of its violation; 
- the recognition of the disputed deal as invalid and the implementation of the consequences of its 
invalidity, and the implementation of the consequences of the invalidity of an insignificant deal; - the recognition as invalid of an act of the state body or of the local self-government body; - the self-defence of the right; - the ruling on the execution of the duty in kind; - the compensation of the losses; - the exaction of the forfeit; - the compensation of the moral damage; - the termination or the amendment of the legal relationship; - the non-application by the court of an act of the state body or of the local self-government body, 
contradicting the law; - using the other law-stipulated methods. 
Article 13. Recognition as Invalid of an Act of the State Body or of the Local 
Self-Government Body 
A non-normative act of the state body or of the local self-government body, and also, in the law
stipulated cases, a normative act, which does not correspond to the law or to the other legal acts and 
which violates the civil rights and the law-protected interests of the citizen or of the legal entity, may be 
recognized by the court as invalid. 
In case the act has been recognized by the court as invalid, the violated right shall be liable to 
restoration or to protection by the other means, stipulated by Article 12 of the present Code. 
Article 14. The Self-Defence of the Civil Rights 
The self-defence of the civil rights shall be admissible. 
The methods of the self-defence shall be proportionate to the violation and shall not go beyond the 
limits of actions that are necessary to suppress it. 
Article 15. Compensation of the Losses 
1. The person, whose right has been violated, shall be entitled to demand the full recovery of the 
losses inflicted upon him, unless the recovery of losses in a smaller amount has been stipulated by the law 
or by the agreement. 
2. Under the losses shall be understood the expenses, which the person, whose right has been 
violated, made or will have to make to restore the violated right, the loss or the damage done to his 
property (the compensatory damage), and also the undeceived profits, which this person would have 
derived under the ordinary conditions of the civil turnover, if his right were not violated (the missed 
profit). 
If the person, who has violated the right of another person, has derived profits as a result of this, the 
person, whose right has been violated, shall have the right to claim, alongside with the compensation of 
his other losses, also the compensation of the missed profit in the amount not less than such profits. 
See Provisional Methodology of Estimating the Extent of Damage (Losses) Caused by Breaches of 
Economic Contracts given by Letter of the State Arbitration of the USSR No. S-12/NA-225 of December 
28, 1990 
Article 16. Compensation of the Losses Caused by the State Bodies and by the 
Local Self-Government Bodies 
The losses, inflicted upon the citizen or upon the legal entity as a result of illegal actions (the 
inaction) on the part of the state bodies, of the local self-government bodies or of the officials thereof, 
including the issue by the state body or by the local self-government body of an act, which is not in 
correspondence with the law or with the other legal act, shall be liable to compensation by the Russian 
Federation, by the corresponding subject of the Russian Federation, or by the municipal entity. 
Subsection 2. The Persons 
Chapter 3. The Citizens (Natural Persons) 
Article 17. The Legal Capacity of the Citizen 
1. The capability to possess the civil rights and to perform duties (the civil legal capacity) shall be 
recognized as equally due to all the citizens. 
2. The citizen's legal capacity shall arise at the moment of his birth and shall cease with his death. 
Article 18. The Content of the Citizens' Legal Capacity 
The citizens may possess the property by the right of ownership; may inherit and bequeath the 
property; may engage in business and in any other activities, not prohibited by the law; may set up legal 
entities - on their own or jointly with other citizens and legal entities; may effect any deals, which are not 
in contradiction with the law, and take part in obligations; may select the place of residence; may enjoy 
the rights of the authors of the works of science, literature and art, of inventions and of other law
protected results of the intellectual activity; and may also enjoy other property and personal non-property 
rights. 
Article 19. The Name of the Citizen 
1. The citizen shall acquire and exercise the rights and duties under his own name, which includes 
the surname and the name proper, as well as the patronymic, unless otherwise following from the law or 
from the national custom. 
In the cases and in the order, stipulated by the law, the citizen shall have the right to make use of a 
pseudonym (an assumed name). 
2. The citizen shall have the right to change his name in conformity with the law-stipulated 
procedure. The citizen's change of the name shall not be the ground for the termination or the change of 
his rights and duties, which he has acquired under his former name. 
The citizen shall be obliged to take the necessary measures to inform his debtors and creditors about 
the change of his name and shall take the risk of the consequences that may arise in case these persons 
have no information on the change of his name. 
The citizen, who has changed his name, shall have the right to demand that the corresponding 
changes be introduced, at his own expense, into the documents, formalized in his former name. 
3. The name, acquired by the citizen at his birth, as well as the change of his name, shall be liable to 
registration in conformity with the procedure, laid down for the registration of the acts of the civil state. 
4. The acquisition of the rights and duties under the name of another person shall not be admitted. 
5. The damage caused to the citizen as a result of an illegal use of his name shall be liable to 
compensation in conformity with the present Code. 
In case the citizen's name has been distorted or used in the ways or in the form, infringing upon his 
honor, dignity or business reputation, the rules shall be applied, stipulated by Article 152 of the present 
Code. 
Article 20. The Place of the Citizen's Residence 
1. The place, where the citizen resides permanently or most of the time, shall be recognized as the 
place of his residence. 
2. The place of residence of the young minors, who have not reached 14 years of age, or of the 
citizens who have been put under the guardianship, shall be recognized as the place of residence of their 
legal representatives - the parents, the adopters or the guardians. 
Article 21. The Active Capacity of the Citizen 
1. The capability of the citizen to acquire and exercise by his actions the civil rights, to create for 
himself the civil duties and to discharge them (the civil active capacity) shall arise in full volume with the 
citizen's coming of age, i.e., upon his reaching the age of 18 years. 
2. In case the law admits the right to enter into a marriage before reaching the age of 18 years, the 
citizen, who has not reached the law-stipulated age of 18, shall acquire the active capacity in full volume 
from the moment of his entering into a marriage. 
The active capacity, acquired as a result of entering into a marriage, shall be retained in full volume 
in case the marriage is dissolved before the citizen's reaching the age of 18 years. 
In case the marriage is recognized as invalid, the court may pass a decision on the underaged spouse 
being deprived of the full active capacity as from the moment fixed by the court. 
Article 22. Inadmissibility of Depriving the Citizen of His Legal and Active 
Capacity and of the Restriction Thereof 
1. No one citizen shall be restricted in his legal and active capacity, with the exception of the cases 
and in conformity with the procedure, stipulated by the law. 
2. The failure to observe the law-stipulated terms and procedure for the restriction of the citizens' 
active capacity or of their right to engage in business or in any other activity shall entail the invalidation 
of the act of the state or of another body, which has established the corresponding restriction. 
3. The full or the partial renouncement by the citizen of his legal or active capacity, and the other 
deals, aimed at the restriction of his legal or active capacity, shall be insignificant, with the exception of 
the cases, when such deals are admitted by the law. 
Article 23. The Citizen's Business Activity 
1. The citizen shall have the right to engage in business activities without forming a legal entity 
from the moment of his state registration in the capacity of an individual businessman. 
2. The head of the peasant (farmer's) economy, performing business activities without setting up a 
legal entity (Article 257), shall be recognized as a businessman from the moment of the state registration 
of the peasant (farmer's) economy. 
3. Toward the citizens' business activities, performed without forming a legal entity, shall be 
correspondingly applied the rules of the present Code, regulating the activity of the legal entities, which 
are commercial organizations, unless otherwise following from the law, from the other legal acts or from 
the substance of the legal relationship. 
4. The citizen, engaged in business activities without forming a legal entity with the violation of the 
requirements of Item 1 of the present Article, shall have no right to refer, with respect to the deals he has 
thus effected, to the fact that he is not a businessman. The court may apply to such deals the rules of the 
present Code on the obligations, involved in the performance of business activities. 
Article 24. The Property Responsibility of the Citizen 
The citizen shall bear responsibility by his obligations with his entire property, with the exception of 
that property, upon which, in conformity with the law, no penalty may be inflicted. 
The list of the citizens' property, onto which no penalty may be imposed, shall be compiled by the 
civil procedural legislation. 
Article 25. Insolvency (Bankruptcy) of the Individual Businessman 
1. The individual businessman, who is incapable of satisfying the claims of his creditors, related to 
his performance of business activities, may be recognized as insolvent (bankrupt) by the court decision. 
From the moment of such decision being passed, his registration in the capacity of an individual 
businessman shall be invalidated. 
2. During the implementation of the procedure, involved in recognizing an individual businessman 
to be bankrupt, his creditors by the obligations, not related to his performance of business activities, shall 
also be entitled to the right to file their claims. The claims of the said creditors, filed by them in this order, 
shall stay in force after the completion of the procedure, involved in declaring the individual businessman 
to be bankrupt. 
3. In case the individual businessman is declared to be bankrupt, the claims of his creditors shall be 
satisfied at the expense of the property in his possession, onto which the penalty may be imposed, in the 
following order: - in the first turn shall be satisfied the claims of the citizens, to whom the businessman bears 
responsibility for inflicting injury to the life or the health - by way of capitalization of the corresponding 
periodical payments, and also the claims for the exaction of aliments; - in the second turn shall be made the settlements, involved in the payment of the retirement 
allowances and in the remuneration of labour with the persons, working by a labour agreement, including 
by a contract, and also in the payment of fees and royalties by the authors' contracts; - in the third turn shall be satisfied the claims of the creditors, secured against by the pledge of the 
property in the possession of the individual businessman; - in the fourth turn shall be serviced the debts by obligatory payments into the budget and into the 
extra-budgetary funds; - in the fifth turn shall be made, in conformity with the law, the settlements with other creditors. 
4. After completing the settlements with the creditors, the individual businessman, recognized as 
bankrupt, shall be relieved of discharging the other obligations, related to his business activities, as well 
as of satisfying the other claims, presented for execution and taken into account when recognizing him to 
be bankrupt. 
The claims of the citizens, to whom the person, declared bankrupt, bears responsibility for inflicting 
injury to the life or the health, and the other claims of a personal nature shall stay in force. 
5. The grounds and the procedure for the court's recognizing an individual businessman to be 
bankrupt, or for his declaring himself bankrupt shall be established by the Law on the Insolvency 
(Bankruptcy). 
Article 26. The Active Capacity of the Minors of 14-18 Years of Age 
1. The minors of from 14 to 18 years of age shall have the right to effect deals, with the exception of 
those listed in Item 2 of the present Article, upon the written consent of their legal representatives - the 
parents, the adopters or the trustee. 
The deal, effected by such a minor, shall be also valid, if it is subsequently approved in written form 
by his parents, adopters or trustee. 
2. The minors of from 14 to 18 years of age shall have the right independently, without the consent 
of the parents, the adopters or the trustee: 
1) to dispose of their earnings, student's grant or other incomes; 
2) to exercise the author's rights to a work of science, literature or art, to an invention or to another 
law-protected result of their intellectual activity; 
3) in conformity with the law, to make deposits into the credit institutions and to dispose of these; 
4) to effect petty everyday deals, and also the other deals, stipulated by Item 2 of Article 28 of the 
present Code. 
On reaching the age of 16 years, the minors shall also acquire the right to be members of 
cooperatives in conformity with the laws on the cooperatives. 
3. The minors of from 14 to 18 years of age shall bear the property responsibility for the deals they 
effect in conformity with Items 1 and 2 of the present Article. For the inflicted damage, such minors shall 
bear responsibility in conformity with the present Code. 
4. In case there are sufficient grounds, the court, upon the request of the parents, the adopters or the 
trustee, or of the guardianship and trusteeship body, may restrict the right of the minor of from 14 to 18 
years of age to independently dispose of his earnings, student's grant or other incomes, or deprive him of 
this right, with the exception of the cases, when such a minor has acquired the full active capacity in 
conformity with Item 2 of Article 21, or with Article 27 of the present Code. 
Article 27. Emancipation 
1. The minor, who has reached the age of 16 years, may be declared to have the full active capacity, 
if he works by a labour agreement, including by a contract, or if he engages in business activities upon the 
consent of the parents, the adopters or the trustee. 
The minor shall be declared as having acquired the full active capacity (emancipation) by the 
decision of the guardianship and trusteeship body - upon the consent of the parents, the adopters or the 
trustee, or, in the absence of such consent - by the court decision. 
2. The parents, the adopters and the trustee shall not bear responsibility for the obligations of an 
emancipated minor, in particular for those obligations, which have arisen as a result of his inflicting 
damage. 
Article 28. The Active Capacity of the Young Minors 
1. Only the parents, the adopters or the guardians shall effect deals on behalf of the minors, who 
have not reached the age of 14 years (the young minors), with the exception of the deals, pointed out in 
Item 2 of the present Article. 
Toward the deals with his property, effected by the legal representatives of the young minor, shall 
be applied the rules, stipulated by Items 2 and 3, Article 37 of the present Code. 
2. The minors of from 6 to 14 years of age shall have the right to independently effect: 
1) petty everyday deals; 
2) the deals, aimed at deriving a free profit, which are not liable to the notary's certification or to the 
state registration; 
3) the deals, involved in the disposal of the means, provided by the legal representative or, upon the 
latter's consent, by a third person for a definite purpose or for a free disposal. 
3. The property responsibility by the young minor's deals, including by the deals he has effected 
independently, shall be borne by his parents, adopters or guardians, unless they prove that the obligation 
has been violated not through their fault. These persons, in conformity with the law, shall also be 
answerable for the damage, caused by the young minors. 
Article 29. Recognizing the Citizen as Legally Incapable 
1. The citizen who, as a result of a mental derangement, can neither realize the meaning of his 
actions nor control them, may be recognized by the court as legally incapable in conformity with the 
procedure, laid down by the procedural legislation. In this case, he shall be put under the guardianship. 
2. The deals on behalf of the citizen, who has been recognized as legally incapable, shall be effected 
by his guardian. 
3. If the grounds, by force of which the citizen was recognized as legally incapable, have ceased to 
exist, the court shall recognize him as legally capable. On the grounds of the court's ruling, the 
guardianship, formerly established over him, shall be recalled. 
Article 30. Restriction of the Citizen's Active Capacity 
1. The active capacity of the citizen, who as a result of his abuse of alcohol or drug addiction has 
plunged his family into a precarious financial position, may be restricted by the court in conformity with 
the procedure, laid down by the procedural legislation. He shall be put under the guardianship. 
Such a citizen shall have the right to independently effect petty everyday deals. 
He shall have the right to effect other kinds of the deals and to receive the earnings, the pension and 
other incomes, and to dispose thereof only upon the consent of his trustee. Nevertheless, such a citizen 
shall independently bear property responsibility by the deals he has effected and for the damage he has 
caused. 
2. If the grounds, by force of which the citizen was restricted in his active capacity, have ceased to 
exist, the court shall cancel the restriction of his active capacity. On the ground of the court ruling, the 
guardianship, formerly established over him, shall be recalled. 
Article 31. The Guardianship and the Trusteeship 
1. The guardianship and the trusteeship shall be established to protect the rights and interests of the 
legally incapable or partially capable citizens. The guardianship and the trusteeship over the minors shall 
also be established for educational purposes. The corresponding rights and duties of the guardians and the 
trustees shall be defined by the legislation on the marriage and the family. 
2. The guardians and the trustees shall not need being vested with special authority to come out in 
defence of the rights and interests of their wards in their relations with any other persons, including in the 
courts. 
3. The guardianship and the trusteeship over the minors shall be established in case the minors have 
no parents and no adopters, in case the parents have been deprived of parental rights by the court, and also 
in those cases, when such citizens have been left without parental care, in particular when the parents 
have been shirking their duties, involved in their education or in the protection of their rights and 
interests. 
Article 32. The Guardianship 
1. The guardianship shall be established over the minors and over the citizens, who have been 
recognized by the court as legally incapable as a result of a mental derangement. 
2. The guardians shall be representatives of their wards by force of the law and shall effect all the 
necessary deals on their behalf and in their interests. 
Article 33. The Trusteeship 
1. The trusteeship shall be established over the minors aged from 14 to 18 years, and also over the 
citizens, who have been restricted in their active capacity as a result of their abuse of alcohol or drug 
addiction. 
2. The trustees shall give their consent for effecting such deals, which the citizens under their 
trusteeship have no right to effect independently. 
The trustees shall render assistance to their wards in their exercising their rights and duties, and shall 
protect them from the possible maltreatment on the part of the third persons. 
Article 34. The Guardianship and Trusteeship Bodies 
1. The guardianship and trusteeship bodies shall be the local self-government bodies. 
2. The court shall be obliged, within three days from the date of the enforcement of its decision on 
recognizing the citizen as legally incapable or on restricting his active capacity, to inform about this the 
guardianship and trusteeship body by the place of this citizen's residence for putting him under the 
guardianship or the trusteeship. 
3. The guardianship and trusteeship body by the place of the wards' residence shall exercise 
supervision over the activities of their guardians and trustees. 
Article 35. The Guardians and the Trustees 
1. The guardian or the trustee shall be appointed by the guardianship and trusteeship body by the 
place of residence of the person in need of guardianship or trusteeship, within the term of one month from 
the moment, when the said bodies have become aware of the need to establish the guardianship or the 
trusteeship over the citizen. In case of the existence of the circumstances, worthy of attention, the 
guardian or the trustee may be appointed by the guardianship and trusteeship body by the place of 
residence of the guardian (the trustee). If the guardian or the trustee is not appointed for the person in 
need of the guardianship or the trusteeship within the term of one month, the execution of the duties of 
the guardian or the trustee shall be temporarily imposed upon the guardianship and trusteeship body. 
The appointment of the guardian or the trustee may be appealed against by the interested persons in 
the court. 
2. Only the adult and legally capable citizens shall be appointed as the guardians and the trustees. 
The citizens, deprived of parental rights, shall not be appointed as the guardians and the trustees. 
3. The guardian or the trustee shall be appointed only upon his consent. Account shall be taken of 
his moral and other personal characteristics, his capability to perform the duties of the guardian or the 
trustee, the relationships, existing between him and the person in need of the guardianship or the 
trusteeship, and, if possible, also of the wish of the ward. 
4. The guardians and the trustees of the citizens in need of the guardianship or the trusteeship, who 
have been kept in or placed into the corresponding educational or medical institutions, into the institutions 
for the social protection of the population or into other similar institutions, shall be these particular 
institutions. 
Article 36. Execution of Their Duties by the Guardians and the Trustees 
1. The duties, involved in the guardianship and the trusteeship, shall be executed free of charge, 
with the exception of the law-stipulated cases. 
2. The guardians and the trustees of the underaged citizens shall be obliged to live together with 
their wards. Residing of the trustee apart from their wards, who have reached 16 years of age, shall be 
admissible only upon the permission of the guardianship and trusteeship body under the condition that 
this may not have a negative effect on the ward's education and on the protection of his rights and 
interests. 
The guardians and the trustees shall be obliged to inform the guardianship and trusteeship bodies on 
the change of their place of residence. 
3. The guardians and the trustees shall be obliged to take care of the maintenance of their wards, to 
provide for them all the essential services and medical treatment, and to protect their rights and interests. 
The guardians and the trustees shall be obliged to take care of their wards' education. 
4. The duties, delineated in Item 3 of the present Article, shall not be imposed upon the guardians 
and the trustees of the adult citizens, who have been restricted in their active capacity by the court. 
5. If the grounds, by force of which the citizen was recognized as legally incapable or partially 
incapable as a result of his abuse of alcohol or drug addiction, have ceased to exist, the guardian or the 
trustee shall be obliged to file a request with the court on his ward to be recognized as legally capable and 
on recalling the guardianship or the trusteeship, formerly established over him. 
Article 37. Disposal of the Ward's Property 
1. The incomes of the citizen, put under the guardianship or the trusteeship, including the incomes 
due to him from the management of his property, with the exception of those incomes, of which the ward 
has the right to dispose independently, shall be spent by the guardian or the trustee exclusively in the 
ward's interest and upon the preliminary permission of the guardianship and trusteeship body. 
The guardian or the trustee shall have the right to make the outlays, necessary for the maintenance 
of the ward, at the expense of the amounts of money, due to the latter by way of his income, without 
obtaining the preliminary permission from the guardianship or trusteeship body. 
2. The guardian shall not have the right to effect, and the trustee - to give his consent to effecting, 
the deals, involved in the alienation of the ward's property, including in the exchange or making a gift of 
it, in leasing it out (renting it), in giving it into a gratuitous use or in pawning it, or to effect the deals, 
entailing the renouncement of the rights possessed by the ward, the division of his property into parts or 
the apportioning of shares out of it, which would entail the reduction of the ward's property. 
The procedure for the management of the ward's property shall be laid down by the law. 
3. The guardian, the trustee, their spouses and close relations shall have no right to effect any deals 
with the ward, with the exception of those involved in giving their own property to the ward as a gift or 
into a gratuitous use, or to substitute the ward in signing the deals or in conducting the court proceedings 
between the ward and the guardian's or the trustee's spouse and their close relations. 
Article 38. Confidential Management of the Ward's Property 
1. In case of a need for the permanent management of the ward's realty and valuable movable 
property, the guardianship and trusteeship body shall sign with the manager, selected by this body, a 
contract on the confidential management of such property. In this case, the guardian or the trustee shall 
retain his powers with respect to that property of the ward, which has not been given into the confidential 
management. 
While the manager exerts the legal powers, involved in the management of the ward's property, the 
rules, stipulated by Items 2 and 3 of Article 37 of the present Code, shall be extended to his activity. 
2. The confidential management of the ward's property shall be terminated on the grounds, 
stipulated by the law for cancelling the contract on the confidential management of the property, and also 
in the cases, when the guardianship and the trusteeship are recalled. 
Article 39. Relieving and Dismissal the Guardians and the Trustees from the 
Execution of Their Duties 
1. The guardianship and trusteeship body shall relieve the guardian or the trustee of the execution of 
his duties in case the ward is returned to his parents or is adopted. 
In case the ward is placed into an educational or into a medical institution, an institution for the 
social protection of the population or into another similar institution, the guardianship and trusteeship 
body shall relieve the formerly appointed guardian or trustee of the execution of his duties, if this does not 
contradict to the ward's interests. 
2. In case of the existence of the sound reasons (such as an illness, the change of the financial 
position, the absence of mutual understanding between him and the ward, etc.), the guardian or the trustee 
may be relieved of the execution of his duties upon his request. 
3. In case of an improper execution by the guardian or by the trustee of the duties imposed on him, 
including in the case of his making use of his guardian's or trustee's status in his own selfish interests or of 
his leaving the ward without the proper supervision and the necessary assistance, the guardianship and 
trusteeship body shall have the right to dismiss the guardian or the trustee from the execution of these 
duties and to take the necessary measures for making the guilty citizen answerable in conformity with the 
law, stipulated liability. 
Article 40. Recalling the Guardianship and the Trusteeship 
1. The guardianship and the trusteeship over the adult citizens shall be recalled in the cases when the 
court passes the decision on recognizing the ward as legally capable or on cancelling the restriction of his 
active capacity upon the petition of the guardian, of the trustee or of the guardianship and trusteeship 
body. 
2. The guardianship over the young minor shall be recalled on his reaching the age of 14 years, and 
the citizen, who has formerly performed the functions of the young minor's guardian, shall become the 
minor's trustee without any additional decision made to this effect. 
3. The trusteeship over the minor shall be recalled without any special decision upon his reaching 
the age of 18 years, and also in the case of his entering into a marriage, or in the other cases, when he 
acquires the full active capacity before attaining his majority (Item 2 of Article 21, and Article 27). 
Article 41. Patronage over the Legally Capable Persons 
1. Upon his request, the adult legally capable person, who on account of the poor condition of his 
health cannot exercise and protect his rights and perform his duties, may be put under the trusteeship in 
the form of patronage. 
2. The patron (assistant) of the adult legally capable citizen may be appointed by the guardianship 
and trusteeship body only upon the consent of such citizen. 
3. The property, belonging to an adult capable ward, shall be disposed of by his patron (assistant) on 
the grounds of the contract of commission or of confidential management, signed with the ward. The 
everyday and other kind of deals, aimed at the maintenance and at the satisfaction of the ward's everyday 
needs, shall be effected by his patron (assistant) upon the consent of the ward. 
4. The patronage over an adult legally capable citizen, established in conformity with Item 1 of the 
present article, shall be recalled upon the demand of the citizen, put under the patronage. 
The patron (assistant) of the citizen, put under the patronage, shall be relieved of the fulfillment of 
the duties imposed on him in the cases, stipulated by Article 39 of the present Code. 
Article 42. Recognition of the Citizen as Missing for an Unknown Reason 
The citizen may be recognized by the court, on the ground of an application, filed by the interested 
persons, as missing for an unknown reason, if at the place of his residence there is no information on the 
place of his stay in the course of one year. 
If it is impossible to establish the date of receiving the last information on the missing person, the 
first day of the month, next to that during which the last information on the missing person was received, 
shall be regarded as the beginning of the term to be calculated for recognizing the fact of the given person 
to be missing for an unknown reason, and in the case of the impossibility to establish this month - the first 
day of January of the next year. 
Article 43. The Consequences of Recognizing the Citizen as Missing for an 
Unknown Reason 
1. If the property, belonging to the citizen, who has been recognized as missing for an unknown 
reason, requires a permanent management, it shall be passed, on the grounds of the court decision, to the 
person, who shall be appointed by the guardianship and trusteeship body and who shall act on the ground 
of the contract of confidential management, signed with the said body. 
Out of this property an allowance shall be paid for the maintenance of the citizens, whom the 
person, missing for an unknown reason, is obliged to keep, and the debts by the other obligations of the 
said person, missing for an unknown reason, shall be serviced. 
2. The guardianship and trusteeship body shall have the right to appoint the manager of the missing 
citizen's property before the expiry of one year from the date of receiving the last information on the place 
of his stay. 
3. The consequences of recognizing the person as missing for an unknown reason, not stipulated by 
the present Article, shall be defined by the law. 
Article 44. Repeal of the Decision on Recognizing the Person as Missing for an 
Unknown Reason 
In case the citizen, who has been recognized as missing for an unknown reason, turns up, or the 
place of his stay is discovered, the court shall repeal its decision on recognizing him as missing for an 
unknown reason. On the grounds of the court's decision, the management of this citizen's property shall 
be recalled. 
Article 45. Declaring the Citizen as Dead 
1. The citizen may be declared by the court as dead, if at the place of his residence there has been no 
information on the place of his stay in the course of five years, and in case he has disappeared under the 
life-hazardous circumstances, or under such circumstances as give the ground for supposing that he might 
have perished as a result of a definite accident - if he has been missing in the course of six months. 
2. The serviceman or the other citizen, who has been missing in connection with military operations, 
shall not be declared by the court as dead until the expiry of two years from the date of the cessation of 
the military operations. 
3. The date of the departure of the citizen, who has been declared as dead, shall be the date of the 
coming into force of the court decision on declaring him as dead. In the case of declaring as dead the 
citizen, who has disappeared under the life-hazardous circumstances or under such circumstances as give 
the ground to suppose that he might have perished as a result of a definite accident, the court may 
recognize the day of this citizen's supposed perish as the date of his death. 
Article 46. The Consequences of the Turning up of the Citizen, Declared as Dead 
1. In the case the citizen, who has been declared as dead, turns up, or the place of his stay is 
discovered, the court shall cancel its decision on declaring him as dead. 
2. Regardless of the time of his turning up, the citizen shall have the right to demand from any 
person the return of the remaining property, which has been gratuitously passed to that person after the 
citizen was declared as dead, with the exception of the cases, stipulated by Item 3 of Article 302 of the 
present Code. 
The persons, to whom the property of the citizen, who has been declared as dead, passed as a result 
of commercial deals, shall be obliged to return to him this property, in case it has been proved that, while 
acquiring the property at issue, they were aware that the citizen, declared as dead, is actually alive. If the 
property at issue cannot be returned in kind, its cost shall be recompensed. 
Article 47. Registration of the Civil State Acts 
1. The following civil state acts shall be liable to the state registration: 
1) the birth; 
2) entering into a marriage; 
3) the dissolution of the marriage; 
4) the adoption; 
5) the establishment of the paternity; 
6) the change of the name; 
7) the death of the citizen. 
2. The registration of the civil state acts shall be effected by the civil registration bodies by making 
the corresponding entries into the Civil Registers (Civil Acts Books) and by issuing certificates to the 
citizens on the ground of these entries. 
3. The civil state acts shall be corrected and amended by the civil registration bodies in case there 
are sufficient grounds for effecting this and there is no dispute between the interested persons. 
If there is a dispute between the interested persons, or if the civil registration body refuses to correct 
or to amend the entry, the dispute shall be resolved by the court. 
The entries on the civil state acts shall be annulled or restored by the civil registration body on the 
ground of the court decision. 
4. The bodies, performing the registration of the civil state acts, the procedure for registering these 
acts, the order of the restoration and annulment of the entries of the civil state acts, the forms for the civil 
acts books and for the certificates, as well as the procedure for and the term of the keeping of the civil 
acts books shall be defined by the Law on the Civil State Acts. 
See Federal Law No. 143-FZ of November 15, 1997 on Acts of Civil Status 
Chapter 4. The Legal Entities 
In conformity with the Federal Law No. 52-FZ of November 30, 1994, Chapter 4 of the Code shall be 
implemented as from the date of the official publication of Part One of the Code 
_ 1. The Basic Provisions 
Article 48. The Concept of the Legal Entity 
1. The legal entity shall be recognized as an organization, which has in its ownership, economic 
management or operative management the set-apart property and which is answerable by its obligations 
with this property and may on its own behalf acquire and exercise the property and the personal non- 
property rights, to discharge duties and to come out as a plaintiff and as a defendant in the court. 
The legal entities shall have an independent balance or an estimate. 
2. In connection with taking part in the formation of the property of the legal entity, its founders 
(participators) shall be entitled to the rights of obligation with respect to this legal entity, or the rights of 
estate to its property. 
To the legal entities, with respect to which their participants have the rights of obligation, shall be 
referred the economic partnerships and companies, and the production and consumer cooperatives. 
Federal Law No. 161-FZ of November 14, 2002 amended paragraph 3 of Item 2 of Article 48 of this 
Code 
See the previous text of the paragraph 
To the legal entities, with respect to whose property their founders have the right of ownership or 
another right of estate, shall be referred the state and the municipal unitary enterprises, as well as the 
institutions, financed by the owner. 
3. To the legal entities, with respect to which their founders (participants) shall not have the 
property rights, shall be referred the public and religious organizations (the associations), the charity and 
other funds, and the amalgamations of the legal entities (the associations and the unions). 
Article 49. The Legal Capacity of the Legal Entity 
1. The legal entity shall enjoy the civil rights that correspond to the goals of its activity, stipulated in 
its constituent documents, and shall discharge the duties related to this activity. 
The commercial organizations, with the exception of the unitary enterprises and the other law
stipulated kinds of organizations, shall possess the civil rights and discharge the civil duties, 
indispensable for the performance of any kinds of activity that are not prohibited by the law. 
The legal entity shall engage in the individual kinds of activity, the list of which shall be defined by 
the law, only on the ground of a special permit (license). 
2. The legal entity may be restricted in its rights only in the cases and in conformity with the 
procedure, stipulated by the law. The decision on the restriction of its rights may be appealed against by 
the legal entity in the court. 
Federal Law No. 83-FZ of July 2, 2005 amended Item 3 of Article 49 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
3. The legal capacity of a legal entity shall arise at the time of its establishment and shall cease at the 
time of making an entry on its exclusion from the Comprehensive State Register of Legal Entities. 
The right of the legal entity to engage in an activity, for the performance of which a license shall be 
drawn, shall arise from the moment of its obtaining such a license, or from the time indicated in the 
license, and shall cease after the expiry of the term of its operation, unless otherwise stipulated by the law 
or by the other legal acts. 
Article 50. Commercial and Non-Profit Organizations 
1. The legal entities may be either the organizations, which see deriving profits as the chief goal of 
their activity (the commercial organizations), or those organizations, which do not see deriving profits as 
such a goal and which do not distribute the derived profit among their participants (the non-profit 
organizations). 
2. The legal entities that are commercial organizations, may be set up in the form of the economic 
partnerships and companies, of the production cooperatives and of the state and the municipal unitary 
enterprises. 
3. The legal entities that are non-profit organizations, may be set up in the form of the consumer 
cooperatives, of the public or religious organizations (associations), financed by the owner of the 
institutions, of the charity and other funds, and also in the other law-stipulated forms. 
Concerning the forms of non-profit organizations see Federal Law No. 7-FZ of January 12, 1996 
The non-profit organizations shall engage in the business activity only so far as it helps them to 
achieve the goals, in the name of which they have been established, and of the kind that corresponds to 
these goals. 
4. The creation of the alliances of the commercial and (or) the non-profit organizations in the form 
of associations and unions shall be admissible. 
Concerning Charitable Organizations see Federal Law No. 135-FZ of August 11, 1995  
Federal Law No. 31-FZ of March 21, 2002 reworded Article 51 of this Code. The amendments shall 
enter into force as of July 1, 2002 
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 51. State Registration of Legal Entities 
1. A legal entity shall be subject to state registration with the authorized state body in conformity 
with the procedure, laid down by the Law on Registration of Legal Entities. The data on state registration 
shall be entered to the Unified State Register of Legal Entities, which shall be open to the general public. 
The refusal of state registration of a legal entity shall be only allowed in the cases stipulated by law. 
The refusal of state registration of a legal entity, as well as the avoidance of such registration, may 
be appealed against with the court. 
2. The legal entity shall be regarded as established from the moment of making an appropriate entry 
to the Unified State Register of Legal Entities. 
Article 52. Constituent Documents of the Legal Entity 
1. The legal entity shall operate on the ground of the Rules, or of the constituent agreement and the 
Rules, or only of the constituent agreement. In the law-stipulated cases, the legal entity, which is not a 
non-profit organization, may operate on the ground of the general provisions on the given type of 
organizations. 
The constituent agreement of the legal entity shall be signed, and the Rules shall be approved by its 
founders (participants). 
The legal entity, created in conformity with the present Code by one founder, shall operate on the 
ground of the Rules, approved by this founder. 
2. In the constituent documents of the legal entity shall be indicated the name of the legal entity, the 
place of its location, the way in which the legal entity's activity is managed, and the other information, 
required by the law for legal entities of the corresponding type. In the constituent documents of the non
profit organizations and of the unitary enterprises, and in the law-stipulated cases - also of the other 
commercial organizations, shall be defined the object and the goals of the legal entity's activity. The 
definition of the object and of the goals, pursued by the commercial organization, may also be stipulated 
by the constituent documents, in the cases, when it is not obligatory by the law. 
In the constituent agreement, the founders shall assume upon themselves an obligation to create the 
legal entity, shall delineate the order of their joint activities, involved in its creation, and the terms for the 
transfer to it of their property and for their participation in its activity. The agreement shall also define the 
terms and procedure for the distribution of the profits and losses among the participants, for the 
management of the legal entity's activity and for the founders' (the participants') withdrawal from its 
structure. 
3. The amendments made in the constituent documents, shall come into force for the third persons 
from the moment of their state registration, and in the cases, established by the law - from the moment of 
notifying about the effecting of such amendments the body, performing the state registration. However, 
the legal entities and their founders (participants) shall not have the right to refer to the absence of the 
registration of such amendments in their relationships with the third persons, who have acted with 
account for such amendments. 
Article 53. The Legal Entity's Bodies 
1. The legal entity shall acquire the civil rights and shall assume upon itself the civil duties through 
its bodies, acting in conformity with the law, with the other legal acts and with the constituent documents. 
The procedure for the appointment or the election of the legal entity's bodies shall be laid down by 
the law and by the constituent documents. 
2. In the law-stipulated cases, the legal entity shall have the right to acquire the civil rights and to 
assume upon itself the civil duties through its participants. 
3. The person, who by force of the law or of the legal entity's constituent documents comes out on 
its behalf, shall act in the interests of the legal entity it represents honestly and wisely. He shall be 
obliged, upon the demand of the founders (the participants) of the legal entity, to recompense the losses 
he has inflicted upon the legal entity, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the agreement. 
Article 54. The Name and the Place of Location of the Legal Entity 
Federal Law No. 161-FZ of November 14, 2002 amended Item 1 of Article 54 of this Code 
See the previous text of the Item 
1. The legal entity shall have its own name, which shall contain an indication of its legal
organizational form. The names of non-commercial organisations, and in the cases specified by law, the 
names of commercial organisations shall contain an indication of the nature of the legal person's activity. 
Federal Law No. 31-FZ of March 21, 2002 reworded Item 2 of Article 54 of this Code. The 
amendments shall enter into force as of July 1, 2002  
See the previous text of the Item 
2. The place of location of a legal entity shall be determined by the place of its state registration. 
The state registration of a legal entity shall be carried out at the location of a standing executive body 
thereof, and in the event of the absence of a standing executive body, it shall be done by other body or 
person empowered to act on behalf of the legal entity without a letter of authority. 
3. The name and the place of location of the legal entity shall be pointed out in its constituent 
documents. 
4. The legal entity, which is a commercial organization, shall have a trade name. 
The legal entity, whose trade name has been registered in conformity with the established 
procedure, shall be entitled to an exclusive right of its use. 
The person, illegally making use of somebody else's registered trade name, shall be obliged, upon 
the demand of the owner of the right to the trade name, to stop making use of it and to recompense the 
inflicted losses. 
The procedure for the registration and the use of the trade name shall be laid down by the law and 
by the other legal acts in conformity with the present Code. 
Article 55. The Representations and the Subsidiaries 
1. The representation shall be a set-apart subdivision of the legal entity, situated outside of the place 
of its location, which represents and protects the legal entity's interests. 
2. The subsidiary shall be the legal entity's set-apart subdivision, situated outside of the place of its 
location and performing all its functions or a part thereof, including the functions of representation. 
3. The representations and the subsidiaries shall not be legal entities. They shall be given the 
property of the legal entity, by which they have been set up, and shall operate in conformity with the 
provisions it has approved. 
The managers of the representations and the subsidiaries shall be appointed by the legal entity and 
shall act on the ground of its warrant. 
The representations and the subsidiaries shall be named in the constituent documents of the legal 
person, who has set them. 
Article 56. The Legal Entity's Responsibility 
1. The legal entities, with the exception of the institutions, financed by their owner, shall be 
answerable by their obligations with the entire property in their possession. 
2. The state-run enterprise and the institution, financed by the owner, shall be answerable by their 
obligations in conformity with the order and on the terms, stipulated by Item 5 of Article 113 and by 
Articles 115 and 120 of the present Code. 
3. The founder (the participant) of the legal entity or the owner of its property shall not be 
answerable by the legal entity's obligations, and the legal entity shall not be answerable by the obligations 
of the founder (the participant) or of the owner, with the exception of the cases, stipulated by the present 
Code or by the constituent documents of the legal entity. 
If the insolvency (bankruptcy) of the legal person has been caused by the founders (participants), by 
the owner of the legal entity's property or by the other persons, who have the right to issue the obligatory 
instructions for the given legal entity, or may determine its actions in any other way, in case the legal 
entity's property proves to be insufficient, the subsidiary liability by the legal entity's obligations may be 
imposed upon such persons. 
Article 57. Reorganization of the Legal Entity 
1. The reorganization of the legal entity (the merger, affiliation, division, branching off, 
transformation) shall be effected by the decision of its founders (participants) or of the legal entity's body, 
authorized for this by the constituent documents. 
2. In the law-stipulated cases, the reorganization of the legal entity in the form of its division or of 
the branching off from its structure of one or of several legal entities, shall be effected by the decision of 
the authorized state bodies or by the court decision. 
If the founders (the participants) of the legal entity, its authorized body or the legal entity's body, 
which has been authorized to effect the reorganization by its constituent documents, fail to effect the legal 
entity's reorganization within the term, fixed in the decision of the authorized state body, the court shall 
appoint, upon the claim of the said state body, an outside manager as the legal entity and shall entrust to 
him the given legal entity's reorganization. From the moment of the appointment of an outside manager, 
the powers, involved in the management of the legal entity's affairs, shall pass to him. The outside 
manager shall come out on behalf of the legal entity in the court, shall compile the divisional balance and 
shall present it for examination to the court, together with the constituent documents of the legal entities, 
created as a result of the reorganization. The endorsement of the said documents by the court shall be the 
ground for the state registration of the newly emerging legal entities. 
See the Methodical Directions In Respect of Accounts' Generation, When Reorganizing Organizations 
endorsed by Order of the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation No. 44n of May 20, 2003. The 
Methodical Directions shall enter into force as from January 1, 2004  
3. In the law-stipulated cases, the reorganization of the legal entities in the form of the merger, 
affiliation or transformation shall be effected only upon the consent of the authorized state bodies. 
4. The legal entity shall be regarded as reorganized, with the exception of the cases of reorganization 
in the form of affiliation, from the moment of the state registration of the newly created legal entities. 
In case of the reorganization of the legal entity in the form of another legal entity's affiliation to it, 
the former shall be regarded as reorganized from the moment of making an entry about the cessation of 
activity of the legal entity, affiliated to it, into the State Register of the Legal Entities. 
On the Reorganization of Credit Institutions in the Form of Merger and of Affiliation, see Regulations 
of the Central Bank of Russia No. 230-P of June 4, 2003  
Article 58. Legal Succession in the Reorganization of Legal Entities 
1. In case of the merger of the legal entities, the rights and duties of every one of them shall pass to 
the newly emerged legal entity in conformity with the transfer deed. 
2. In case of the legal entity's affiliation to another legal entity, the rights and duties of the former 
legal entity shall pass to the latter legal entity in conformity with the transfer deed. 
3. In case of the division of the legal entity, its rights and duties shall pass to the newly emerged 
legal entities in conformity with the divisional balance. 
4. In case of the branching off from the structure of the legal entity of one or of several legal 
entities, the rights and duties of the reorganized legal entity shall pass to every one of these in conformity 
with the divisional balance. 
5. In case of the transformation of the legal entity of one type into a legal entity of a different type 
(the change of its legal-organizational form), the rights and duties of the reorganized legal entity shall 
pass to the newly emerged legal entity in conformity with the transfer deed. 
Article 59. The Transfer Deed and the Divisional Balance 
1. The transfer deed and the divisional balance shall contain provisions on the legal succession by 
all obligations of the reorganized legal entity with respect to all its creditors and debtors, including the 
obligations, disputed by the parties. 
2. The transfer deed and the divisional balance shall be endorsed by the founders (participants) of 
the legal entity or by the body, which has adopted the decision on the reorganization of the legal entities, 
and shall be presented, together with the constituent documents, for the state registration of the newly 
emerged legal entities, or for the introduction of amendments into the constituent documents of the 
existing legal entities. 
The failure to present, together with the constituent documents, correspondingly, the transfer deed 
or the divisional balance, and the absence in these of the provisions on the legal succession by the 
obligations of the reorganized legal entity, shall entail the refusal to effect the state registration of the 
newly emerged legal entities. 
Article 60. Guarantees for the Rights of the Legal Entity's Creditors in Case of Its 
Reorganization 
1. The founders (the participants) of the legal entity or the body, which have adopted the decision on 
the legal entity's reorganization, shall be obliged to notify about it in written form the creditors of the 
reorganized legal entity. 
2. The creditor of the reorganized legal entity shall have the right to claim that the obligation, by 
which the given legal entity is the debtor, be terminated or that the latter discharge it before the fixed date. 
3. If the divisional balance does not make it possible to define the legal successor of the reorganized 
legal entity, the newly emerged legal entities shall bear to its creditors the joint responsibility. 
On Some Questions of the Application by Arbitration Courts of Article 61 of the Civil Code of the 
Russian Federation, see the Circular Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the 
Russian Federation No. 84 of August 13, 2004  
Article 61. Liquidation of the Legal Entity 
1. The liquidation of the legal entity shall entail its termination without the transfer of its rights and 
duties to the other entities by way of legal succession. 
Federal Law No. 31-FZ of March 21, 2002 reworded Item 2 of Article 61 of this Code. The 
amendments shall enter into force as of July 1, 2002  
See the previous text of the Item 
2. The legal entity may be liquidated: - by the decision of its founders (participants), or of the legal entity's body, authorized for this by the 
constituent documents, including in connection with the expiry of the term, for which the given legal 
entity has been created, with its achieving the goal, for the sole purpose of which it has been established; - by the court decision in case of gross violations of law made in the establishment thereof, where 
these violations cannot be rectified, or of the performance of an activity without a proper permit (license), 
or of an activity, prohibited by the law, or with other gross violations of the law or of the other legal acts, 
or in case of the systematic performance by the public or by the religious organization (the association), 
by the charity or the other fund of an activity, contradicting the goals, set in its Rules, and also in the 
other cases, stipulated by the present Code. 
3. The claim for the liquidation of the legal entity on the grounds, stipulated in Item 2 of the present 
Article, may be lodged with a court by the state body or by the local self-government body, to which the 
right to present such a claim has been granted by the law. 
By the court decision on the liquidation of the legal entity, the fulfillment of the duties, involved in 
implementing the liquidation of the legal entity, may be imposed upon its founders (participants), or upon 
the body, authorized to effect the liquidation of the legal entity by its constituent documents. 
4. The legal entity, which is a commercial organization or which operates in the form of a consumer 
cooperative, a charity or another fund, shall also be liquidated in conformity with Article 65 of the present 
Code as a result of its being recognized as insolvent (bankrupt). 
See Information Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 
50 of January 13, 2000 "Overview of the Practice of Settlement of Disputes Associated with Liquidation 
of Legal Persons (Commercial Organizations)"  
If the cost of the legal entity's property proves to be insufficient to satisfy the creditors' claims, it 
shall be liquidated only in conformity with the procedure, stipulated by Article 65 of the present Code. 
The provisions on the liquidation of the legal entities as a result of their insolvency (bankruptcy) 
shall not be extended to the state-run enterprises. 
On the application of Items 2 and 4 of Article 61 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation see 
Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 23 of December 
5, 1997  
Concerning liquidation of non-profit organizations see Federal Law No. 7-FZ of January 12, 1996 
Article 62. The Duties of the Person Who Has Adopted the Decision on the 
Liquidation of the Legal Entity 
Federal Law No. 31-FZ of March 21, 2002 reworded Items 1 and 2 of Article 62 of this Code. The 
amendments shall enter into force as of July 1, 2002 
See the previous text of the Items 
1. The founders (the participants) of a legal entity or the body, who (which) have adopted the 
decision on liquidation of the legal entity, shall be obliged to immediately notify about this in written 
form the authorized state body which shall enter the information on the given legal entity, being in the 
process of liquidation, to the Unified State Register of Legal Entities. 
2. The founders (the participants) of a legal entity or the body, who (which) have adopted the 
decision on liquidation of the legal entity, shall appoint a liquidation commission (the liquidator), and 
shall establish, in conformity with the present Code and other laws, the procedure for, and the term of, 
liquidation thereof. 
3. From the moment of appointment of the liquidation commission, the powers involved in the 
management of the legal entity's affairs shall pass to it. The liquidation commission shall also come out 
on behalf of the liquidated legal entity in the court. 
Article 63. Procedure for the Legal Entity's Liquidation 
1. The liquidation commission shall send to the press organs, in which information on the state 
registration of the legal entity is published, an advertisement on its liquidation and on the procedure and 
the term for the claims to be filed by its creditors. 
The liquidation commission shall take measures for the exposure of the creditors and the exaction of 
the debit indebtedness, and shall notify the creditors in written form about the liquidation of the legal 
entity. 
2. After the expiry of the term fixed for the creditors' filing claims, the liquidation commission shall 
compile an intermediary liquidation balance, containing information on the structure of the legal entity's 
property, on the list of the creditors' claims and on the results of their examination. 
Federal Law No. 31-FZ of march 21, 2002 reworded paragraph 2 of Item 2 of Article 63 of this Code. 
The amendments shall enter into force as of July 1, 2002  
See the previous text of the paragraph 
The intermediary liquidation balance shall be approved by the founders (the participants) of a legal 
entity or by the body, which has adopted the decision on the legal entity's liquidation. In the cases 
established by law the intermediary liquidation balance shall be endorsed by agreement with the 
authorized state body. 
3. If the monetary means at the disposal of the legal entity under liquidation (except for the 
institutions) prove to be insufficient to satisfy the creditors' claims, the liquidation commission shall 
organize the sale of the legal entity's property at a public auction in conformity with the procedure, laid 
down for the execution of the court decisions. 
4. The payment of monetary amounts to the creditors of the liquidated legal entity shall be effected 
by the liquidation commission according to the order of priority, established by Article 64 of the present 
Code, in conformity with the intermediary liquidation balance, beginning with the date of its approval, 
with the exception of the creditors of the fifth turn, to whom the payments shall be made on the expiry of 
one month from the date of the endorsement of the intermediary liquidation balance. 
Federal Law No. 31-FZ of March 21, 2002 reworded Item 5 of Article 63 of this Code. The 
amendments shall enter into force as of July 1, 2002  
See the previous text of the Item 
5. After completing the settlements with the creditors, the liquidation commission shall compile the 
liquidation balance, which must be approved by the founders (the participants) of the legal entity, or by 
the body, which has adopted the decision on the legal entity's liquidation. In the cases established by law 
the liquidation balance shall be approved by agreement with the authorized state body. 
6. In case the property at the disposal of the liquidated state-run enterprise, or the monetary means at 
the disposal of the liquidated institution are insufficient to satisfy the creditors' claims, the latter shall 
have the right to turn to the court with a claim for the satisfaction of the rest of the claims at the expense 
of the owner of the property of this enterprise or institution. 
7. The property of the liquidated legal person, left after the creditors' claims are satisfied, shall be 
passed to its founders (participants), who have the rights of estate to this property, if not otherwise 
stipulated by the law, by the other legal acts or by the founding documents of the legal entity. 
8. The liquidation of the legal entity shall be regarded as completed and the legal entity as having 
ceased existence after an entry to this effect has been made into the Unified State Register of the Legal 
Entities. 
Federal Law No. 97-FZ of July 29, 2004 amended Article 64 of this Code. The amendments shall enter 
into force form the day of entry into force of Federal Law No. 96-FZ of July 29, 2004 on the Bank of 
Russia's Disbursements Relating to Natural Persons' Deposits in the Banks Deemed Bankrupt Which 
Do Not Take Part in the System of Compulsory Insurance of Natural Persons' Deposits in the Banks of 
the Russian Federation  
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 64. Satisfaction of the Creditors' Claims 
1. In case of the liquidation of a legal entity, the creditors' claims shall be satisfied in the following 
order of priority: - in the first turn shall be satisfied the claims of the citizens, to whom the liquidated legal entity 
bears responsibility for causing harm to the life or the health, by way of capitalization of the 
corresponding regular payments; - in the second turn shall be effected the settlements, involved in the payment of retirement 
allowances and in the remuneration of labour to the persons, who have been employed on the ground of a 
labour agreement, including by a contract, and also those involved in the payment of fees by the author's 
contracts. - in the third turn shall be satisfied the claims of the creditors by the obligations, secured against by 
the property of the liquidated legal entity; - in the fourth turn shall be repaid the debts by the obligatory payments into the budget and into the 
extra-budgetary funds; - in the fifth turn shall be effected the settlements with the other creditors in conformity with the 
law. 
In the liquidation of banks or any other credit institutions attracting the resources of citizens, in the 
first place there shall be satisfied the demands of the citizens who are creditors of the banks or of any 
other credit institutions attracting the funds of citizens and also the requirements for the organisation that 
discharges the functions of the obligatory insurance of deposits in connection with the payment of 
compensation for deposits in accordance with the law on the insurance of deposits of individuals with 
banks and the Central Bank of Russia in connection with payments for deposits by natural persons in the 
banks in accordance with the law. 
2. The claims of each of these groups shall be satisfied after fully satisfying the claims of the 
previous groups. 
3. In case the property of the liquidated legal entity proves to be insufficient, it shall be distributed 
among the creditors of the corresponding group proportionately to the amounts of the claims liable to 
satisfaction, if not otherwise stipulated by the law. 
4. In case the liquidation commission refuses to satisfy the creditor's claim or evades its 
consideration, the creditor shall have the right, until the approval of the legal entity's liquidation balance, 
to turn to the court with a claim against the liquidation commission. By the court decision, the creditor's 
claims may be satisfied at the expense of the remaining property of the liquidated legal entity. 
5. The creditor's claims, lodged after the expiry of the term, fixed by the liquidation commission for 
their presentation , shall be satisfied from the property of the liquidated legal entity, which has been left 
after the duly lodged creditors' claims have been satisfied. 
6. The creditors' claims, left unsatisfied because of the insufficiency of the property of the liquidated 
legal entity, shall be regarded as settled, the same as the claims of the creditors, which have not been 
recognized by the liquidation commission, if the creditor did not file the claim with a court, and also those 
claims, which have been rejected by the court ruling. 
Article 65. Insolvency (Bankruptcy) of the Legal Entity 
1. The legal entity, which is a commercial organization, with the exception of the state-run 
enterprise, and the legal entity, operating in the form of a consumer cooperative or of a charity or another 
kind of the fund, may be recognized by the court decision as insolvent (bankrupt), if it is incapable to 
satisfy the creditors' claims. 
The recognition of the legal entity to be bankrupt shall entail its liquidation. 
2. The legal entity, which is a commercial organization, and also the legal entity, operating in the 
form of a consumer cooperative or of a charity or another kind of the fund, may jointly with the creditors 
adopt the decision on declaring itself to be bankrupt and on its voluntary liquidation. 
3. The grounds for the court recognizing the legal entity to be bankrupt or for its declaring itself to 
be bankrupt, and the procedure for the liquidation of such a legal entity shall be laid down by the Law on 
the Insolvency (Bankruptcy). The creditors' claims shall be satisfied according to the order of priority, 
stipulated by Item 1 of Article 64 of the present Code. 
On insolvency (bankruptcy) of credit institutions see Federal Law No. 40-FZ of February 25, 1999  
_ 2. The Economic Partnerships and Companies 
1. The General Provisions 
Article 66. The Basic Provisions on the Economic Partnerships and Companies 
1. The economic partnerships and companies shall be recognized as commercial organizations with 
the authorized (joint) capital, divided into the shares (investments) of the founders (the participants). The 
property, formed at the expense of the founders' (the participants') contributions, the same as that 
produced and acquired by the economic partnership or by the company in the process of its activity, shall 
belong to it by the right of ownership. 
In the cases, stipulated by the present Code, an economic company may be created by one person, 
who becomes its only participant. 
2. The economic partnerships may be established in the form of a general partnership and of a 
limited (commandite) partnership. 
3. The economic partnerships may also be created in the form of a joint-stock company with a 
limited or a double responsibility. 
According to Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 115-FZ of July 19, 1998 the economic 
partnerships may be created in the form of a workers' joint-stock company (the people's enterprise)  
4. The participants in the general partnerships and the general partners in the limited (commandite) 
partnerships may be the individual businessmen and (or) the commercial organizations. 
The participants in the economic companies and the investors in the limited (commandite) 
partnerships may be the citizens and the legal entities. 
The state bodies and the local self-government bodies shall not have the right to be the participants 
in the economic companies and the investors in the limited partnerships, if not otherwise stipulated by the 
law. 
The institutions, financed by their owners, may be the participants in the economic companies and 
the investors in the partnerships upon the owner's permission, unless otherwise stipulated by the law. 
The law may prohibit or restrict the participation of the individual categories of citizens in the 
economic partnerships and companies, with the exception of the public joint-stock companies. 
5. The economic partnerships and companies may be the founders (the participants) of the other 
economic partnerships and companies, with the exception of the cases, stipulated by the present Code and 
by the other laws. 
6. Contributed to the property of an economic partnership or of a company may be the money, the 
securities and the other things, or the property and the other rights that may be evaluated in money. 
In accordance with Federal Law No. 116-FZ of July 22, 2005, a resident of a special economic zone 
using on a leasehold basis a land plot, which is in the state or municipal ownership, shall not be 
entitled to contribute its rights to the authorised capital of economic partnerships and companies  
According to Federal Law No. 137-FZ of October 25, 2001, contribution of a right of permanent (in 
perpetuity) use of a plot of land into the authorised (aggregate) capitals of commercial organisations is 
hereby prohibited  
The monetary evaluation of the contribution, made by the participant in the economic company, 
shall be effected by an agreement between the founders (participants) of the company; in the law
stipulated cases, it shall be subject to an independent expert examination. 
7. The economic partnerships, and also the companies with a limited and a double responsibility 
shall not have the right to issue shares. 
Article 67. The Rights and Duties of the Participants in the Economic Partnership 
or Company 
1. The participants in the economic partnership or company shall have the right: - to take part in the management of affairs of the partnership or company, with the exception of the 
cases, stipulated by Item 2, Article 84 of the present Code and by the Law on the Joint-Stock Companies; - to get informed on the activity of the partnership or company and to get acquainted with its 
accounting books and other documentation in conformity with the procedure, laid down by the constituent 
documents; - to take part in the distribution of profits; - to receive, in the case of the partnership's or the company's liquidation, a part of its property, left 
after the settlements with the creditors, or the cost thereof. 
2. The participants in the economic partnership or company shall be obliged: - to make investments in the order, in the amount, in the ways and within the term, stipulated by the 
constituent documents; - to keep secret the confidential information on the partnership's or the company's activity. 
The participants in the economic partnership or company may also discharge the other duties, 
stipulated by the constituent documents. 
Article 68. Transformation of the Economic Partnerships and Companies 
1. The economic partnerships and companies of one type may be transformed into the economic 
partnerships and companies of another type or into the production cooperatives, by the decision of the 
general meeting of their participants in conformity with the procedure, stipulated by the present Code. 
2. In case the partnership is transformed into a company, each general partner, who has become the 
participant (the share-holder) of the company, shall bear in the course of two years the subsidiary 
responsibility with his entire property by the obligations, which have passed to the company from the 
partnership. The alienation by the former partner of the participation shares (shares) in his possession 
shall not exempt him from such responsibility. The rules, expatiated in the present Item, shall be 
correspondingly applied in case the partnership is transformed into a production cooperative. 
2. The General Partnership 
Article 69. The Basic Provisions on the General Partnership 
1. The partnership, whose participants (general partners) are engaged, in conformity with the 
agreement signed between them, in business activities on behalf of the partnership and bear responsibility 
by its obligations with the property in their possession, shall be recognized as the general partnership. 
2. The person shall have the right to be the participant of only one general partnership. 
3. The trade name of the general partnership shall contain either the names (the titles) of all its 
participants and the words "general partnership", or the name (the title) of one or of several of its 
participants, with the words "and Co." and "general partnership" to be added. 
Article 70. The Constituent Agreement of the General Partnership 
1. The general partnership shall be created and shall operate on the ground of a constituent 
agreement. The constituent agreement shall be signed by all its participants. 
2. The constituent agreement of the general partnership shall contain, in addition to the information, 
stipulated in Item 2, Article 52 of the present Code, the terms for the amount and structure of the joint 
capital of the partnership; on the amount and the procedure for changing the share of each of the 
participants in the joint capital; on the amount, the structure, the term and the order, set for their making 
investments; and on the liability for the violation of the duties, involved in making such investments. 
Article 71. Management in the General Partnership 
1. The activity of the general partnership shall be managed by the general agreement of all its 
participants. The constituent agreement of the partnership may also indicate the cases, when the decision 
shall be adopted by the majority of the participants' votes. 
2. Every participant of the general partnership shall have one vote, if the constituent agreement does 
not stipulate a different order for the definition of its participants' votes. 
3. Every participant of the partnership shall have the right to get acquainted with the entire 
documentation on the business management, regardless of whether he has been authorized to perform the 
partnership's business management. The renouncement of this right or its restriction, including by the 
agreement of the partnership's participants, shall be insignificant. 
Article 72. Business Management of the General Partnership 
1. Every participant of the general partnership shall have the right to operate on behalf of the 
partnership, unless the constituent agreement has laid it down that all its participants shall effect the 
business management jointly, or unless the business management has been entrusted to the individual 
participants. 
If the partnership's participants effect a joint business management of the partnership, to make any 
one deal, the consent of all the participants of the partnership shall be required. 
If the business management of the partnership has been entrusted by its participants to one or to 
several persons from among them, the other participants, who are going to make a deal on behalf of the 
partnership, shall receive a warrant from the participant (the participants), to whom the business 
management of the partnership has been entrusted. 
The partnership shall not have the right to refer, in its relations with the third persons, to the 
provisions of the constituent agreement, restricting the powers of the partnership participants, with the 
exception of the cases, when the partnership can prove that at the moment of effecting the deal, the third 
person was aware, or should have been aware, of the partnership participant's having no right to act on 
behalf of the partnership. 
2. The powers for the management of the partnership affairs, granted to one or to several of its 
participants, may be terminated by the court on the demand of one or of several other partnership 
participants, if there are serious grounds for this, in particular, if the authorized person (persons) has 
(have) committed a gross violation of their duties, or if he (they) have proved to be incapable of a wise 
management of the affairs. The necessary changes shall be introduced into the constituent agreement of 
the partnership on the grounds of the court decision. 
Article 73. The Duties of the Participant of the General Partnership 
1. The participant of the general partnership shall take part in its activities in conformity with the 
terms of the constituent agreement. 
2. The participant of the general partnership shall put at least a half of his contribution into the 
partnership's joint capital by the moment of its registration. The remaining part shall be put in by the 
participant within the term, fixed by the constituent agreement. In case he fails to discharge the said duty, 
the participant shall be obliged to pay to the partnership an annual 10 per cent from the underpaid part of 
the contribution and to recompense the inflicted losses, unless the other consequences have been 
stipulated by the constituent agreement. 
3. The participant in a general partnership shall not have the right to make on his own behalf and in 
his own interest, or in the interest of the third persons, without the consent of the rest of the participants, 
the deals, which are similar to those that are the object of the partnership's activity. 
If this rule is violated, the partnership shall have the right to demand, according to his choice, either 
that the given participant recompense the losses he has caused to the partnership, or that the entire profit 
he has derived by such deals be transferred to the partnership. 
Article 74. Distribution of the Profits and Losses of the General Partnership 
1. The profits and losses of the general partnership shall be distributed among its participants 
proportionately to their shares in the joint capital, if not otherwise stipulated by the constituent agreement 
or by another agreement, signed by the participants. No agreement on the exclusion of any partnership 
participants from the distribution of the profits and losses shall be admitted. 
2. If, as a result of the losses the partnership has sustained, the value of its net assets shrinks to less 
than the amount of its joint capital, the profit, derived by the partnership, shall not be distributed among 
its participants until the value of its net assets exceeds the amount of the joint capital. 
Article 75. Responsibility of the Participants of the General Partnership by Its 
Obligations 
1. The participants of the general partnership shall jointly bear the subsidiary responsibility by the 
partnership's obligations with their entire property. 
2. The participant of the general partnership, who is not its founder, shall be answerable on a par 
with the other participants by the obligations, which have arisen before the date of his joining the 
partnership. 
The participant, who has withdrawn from the partnership, shall be answerable by the partnership's 
obligations, which have arisen before the moment of his retirement, on a par with the rest of the 
participants in the course of 2 years from the date of the approval of the accounting report on the activity 
of the partnership over the year, during which he has retired from the partnership. 
3. The agreement of the partnership participants on the restriction or elimination of the 
responsibility, stipulated in the present Article, shall be insignificant. 
Article 76. The Change of the General Partnership's Membership 
1. In case of the withdrawal or death of any one of the participants from the general partnership, the 
recognition of one of them as missing, legally incapable or partially capable, or as insolvent (bankrupt), or 
if the re-organizational procedures are instituted against one of the participants by the court ruling, or if a 
legal entity, which is a member of the partnership, is liquidated or the creditor of one of the participants 
turns the exaction of his debt onto the part of the property, amounting to the participant's share in the 
partnership's joint capital, the partnership may continue its activity, if this is stipulated by the constituent 
agreement of the partnership or by an agreement, signed between the rest of its participants. 
2. The participants of the general partnership shall have the right to demand through the court that a 
certain participant be expelled from the partnership in conformity with the unanimous decision of the 
remaining participants and in the face of the serious grounds, in particular, on account of his gross 
violation of his duties or of his proving to be incapable of a wise management of affairs. 
Article 77. The Participant's Withdrawal from the General Partnership 
1. The participant of the general partnership shall have the right to retire from it after having 
declared his refusal to take part in it. 
The participant shall declare his refusal to take part in the general partnership, created without 
indicating the term of operation, not less than 6 months in advance before his actual withdrawal from the 
partnership. The refusal to take part in the general partnership, created for a certain term, before the 
expiry of the said term, shall be admitted only on the valid grounds. 
2. The agreement on the renouncement of the right to withdraw from the partnership, signed 
between the partnership participants, shall be insignificant. 
Article 78. The Consequences of the Participant's Withdrawal from the General 
Partnership 
1. The participant, who has retired from the general partnership, shall be paid out the cost of the 
share of the partnership's property, corresponding to this participant's share in the joint capital, if not 
otherwise stipulated by the constituent agreement. By an agreement reached between the retiring 
participant and the rest of the participants, the payment out of the cost of the property may be replaced by 
the transfer of the property in kind. 
The part of the partnership's property due to the retiring participant, or its cost shall be defined by 
the balance, which shall be compiled by the moment of his withdrawal, with the exception of the cases, 
stipulated by Article 80 of the present Code. 
2. In case of the death of the participant of the general partnership, his heir may join the general 
partnership only upon the consent of all the other participants. 
The legal entity - the successor of the reorganized legal entity, which was a member of the general 
partnership, shall have the right to join the general partnership upon the consent of its other participants, if 
not otherwise stipulated by the partnership's constituent agreement. 
The settlements with the heir (successor), who has not joined the partnership, shall be effected in 
conformity with Item 1 of the present Article. The heir (successor) of the participant of the general 
partnership shall bear responsibility by the partnership's obligations to the third persons, by which, in 
conformity with Item 2 of Article 75 of the present Code, the departed participant was answerable, within 
the amount of the property of the departed participant, passed to him. 
3. In the case of one of the participants retiring from the partnership, the shares of the remaining 
participants in the partnership's joint capital shall correspondingly increase, unless otherwise stipulated by 
the constituent documents. 
Article 79. Transfer of the Participant's Share in the General Partnership's Joint 
Capital 
The participant of the general partnership shall have the right, with the consent of the rest of its 
participants, to transfer his share in the joint capital, or a part thereof, to another participant of the 
partnership or to the third person. 
When the share (a part of the share) is transferred to another person, the full rights or the 
corresponding part thereof, formerly possessed by the participant, who has effected the transfer of his 
share (a part of the share), shall also pass to the former. The person, to whom the share (a part of the 
share) has been transferred, shall bear responsibility by the partnership's obligations in conformity with 
the procedure, laid down by first paragraph of Item 2 of Article 75 of the present Code. 
The transfer of his entire share to another person, effected by the participant of the partnership, shall 
entail the termination of his participation in the partnership and also the consequences, stipulated by Item 
2 of Article 75 of the present Code. 
Article 80. Turning the Penalty onto the Share of the Participant in the Joint 
Capital of the General Partnership 
The turning of the penalty onto the participant's share in the joint capital of the partnership by the 
participant's own debts shall be admissible only if his own property proves to be insufficient to cover his 
debts. The creditors of such a participant shall have the right to demand from the general partnership that 
it separate the part of the partnership's property that would correspond to the debtor's share in the joint 
capital, so that the penalty may be turned onto this property. The part of the partnership property, subject 
to being singled out, or the cost thereof, shall be defined by the balance, compiled by the moment when 
the creditors file the claim for it to be separated. 
The turning of the penalty onto the property, which corresponds to the participant's share in the joint 
capital of the general partnership, shall signify the termination of his participation in the partnership and 
shall also entail the consequences, stipulated by Paragraph 2 of Item 2 of Article 75 of the present Code. 
Article 81. Liquidation of the General Partnership 
The general partnership shall be liquidated on the grounds, indicated in Article 61 of the present 
Code, and also in case only one participant is left in it. Such a participant shall have the right, in the 
course of 6 months from the moment when he has become the only participant of the partnership, to 
transform such a partnership into an economic company in conformity with the procedure, laid down by 
the present Code. 
The general partnership shall also be liquidated in the cases, stipulated in Item 1 of Article 76 of the 
present Code, unless it has been stipulated by the constituent documents of the partnership, or by an 
agreement, signed between the remaining participants, that the partnership shall continue its activity. 
3. The Limited Partnership 
Article 82. The Basic Provisions for the Limited Partnership 
1. The limited (commandite) partnership shall be recognized as such a partnership, in which, 
alongside the participants, engaged in the performance of the business activity on behalf of the 
partnership and answerable by the obligations of the partnership with their property (the general partners), 
there is (are) also one or several participants-investors (commanditaires), who bear the risk of the losses 
in connection with the partnership's activity within the amount of their investments and who do not take 
part in the performance of the partnership's business activity. 
2. The position of the general partners in the commandite partnership and their liability by the 
partnership's obligations shall be defined by the rules on the participants of the general partnership, laid 
down by the present Code. 
3. The person shall be the general partner only in one commandite partnership. 
The participant of the general partnership shall not be the general partner in the commandite 
partnership. 
4. The trade name of the commandite partnership shall contain either the names (the titles) of all its 
general partners and the words "limited partnership" or "commandite partnership", or the name (the title) 
of at least one of its general partners and the words "and Co.", and also the words "limited partnership" or 
"commandite partnership". 
If into the trade name of the partnership is included the name of the investor, this investor shall 
become the general partner. 
5. Toward the limited (commandite) partnership shall be applied the rules on the general 
partnership, laid down in the present Code, so far as this does not contradict the rules of the present Code 
on the limited partnership. 
Article 83. The Constituent Agreement of the Limited Partnership 
1. The limited partnership shall be created and shall operate on the ground of the constituent 
agreement. The constituent agreement shall be signed by all the general partners. 
2. The constituent agreement of the limited partnership shall contain, in addition to the information, 
indicated in Item 2, Article 52 of the present Code, the terms on the amount and structure of the joint 
capital of the partnership; on the amount of and the procedure for changing the shares of each of the 
general partners in the joint capital; on the amount, the structure, the term and the order of their making 
investments, their liability for violating the duties, involved in making the investments; on the aggregate 
amount of the contributions, made by the investors. 
Article 84. Administrative and Business Management in the Limited Partnership 
1. The activity of the limited partnership shall be led by its general partners. The procedure for the 
administrative and business management of such a partnership by its general partners shall be established 
according to the rules on the general partnership, laid down in the present Code. 
2. The investors shall not have the right to take part in the administrative and business management 
of the limited partnership or to come out on its behalf other than by a warrant. Neither shall they have the 
right to dispute the actions of the general partners involved in the administrative and business 
management of the partnership. 
Article 85. The Rights and Duties of the Investor of the Limited Partnership 
1. The investor of the limited partnership shall be obliged to make an investment into the joint 
capital. The fact of his making the investment shall be confirmed by the participation certificate, issued to 
the investor by the partnership. 
2. The investor of the limited partnership shall have the right: 
1) to receive a part of the partnership's profit, due for his share in the joint capital, in conformity 
with the procedure, stipulated by the constituent agreement; 
2) to get acquainted with the partnership's annual reports and balances; 
3) on the expiry of the fiscal year, to retire from the partnership and to withdraw his investment in 
conformity with the procedure, laid down by the constituent agreement; 
4) to transfer his share in the joint capital or a part thereof to another investor or to a third person. 
The investors shall be entitled to the preferential right, in comparison with the third persons, to buy the 
share (a part thereof) as applied to the terms and order, stipulated by Item 2 of Article 93 of the present 
Code. The transfer by the investor of his entire share to another person shall amount to the termination of 
his membership in the partnership. 
The constituent agreement of the limited partnership may also stipulate other rights of the investor. 
Article 86. Liquidation of the Limited Partnership 
1. The limited partnership shall be liquidated in case all the investors have retired from it. However, 
the general partners shall have the right, instead of the liquidation of the limited partnership, to transform 
it into a general partnership. 
The limited partnership shall also be liquidated on the grounds, stipulated for the liquidation of the 
general partnership (Article 81). However, the limited partnership shall continue operation, if at least one 
general partner and one investor are left in it. 
2. In case of the liquidation of the limited partnership, including in the case of its bankruptcy, the 
investors shall have the preferential right before the general partners to get back their investments from 
the property of the partnership, left after the creditors' claims have been satisfied. 
The property of the partnership, left after this, shall be distributed among the general partners and 
the investors proportionately to their shares in the partnership's joint capital, if not otherwise stipulated by 
the constituent agreement or by an agreement between the general partners and the investors. 
4. The Limited Liability Company 
Article 87. The Basic Provisions on the Limited Liability Company 
1. The limited liability company shall be recognized as the company, established by one or by 
several persons, whose authorized capital is divided into the shares, the size of which is stipulated by the 
constituent documents; the participants of the limited liability company shall not be answerable by its 
obligations and shall bear the risk of the losses in connection with the company's activity within the cost 
of the contributions they have made. 
The participants of the company, who have not made their contributions in full volume, shall bear 
joint responsibility by its obligations within the cost of the underpaid part of the contribution of each of 
the participants. 
2. The trade name of the limited liability company shall contain the name of the company and the 
words, "limited liability". 
3. The legal position of the limited liability company, and the rights and duties of its participants 
shall be defined by the present Code and by the Law on the Limited Liability Companies. 
Federal Law No. 138-FZ of July 8, 1999 supplemented Item 3 of Article 87 of this Code with the 
following paragraph  
The peculiarities of the legal status of the credit organizations set up in the form 
of a limited liability company, the rights and duties of the stakeholders thereof shall 
also be provided by the laws governing the activities of credit organizations. 
Article 88. Participants in the Limited Liability Company 
1. The number of participants in the limited liability company shall not exceed the limit, established 
by the Law on the Limited Liability Companies. Otherwise it shall be subject to transformation into a 
joint-stock company in the course of a year; on the expiry of this term, if the number of its participants 
has not been reduced to the law-established limit, it shall be liquidated by the court decision. 
On the transformation of limited liability companies if the number of their partners exceeds 50 see 
Federal Law No. 14-FZ of February 8, 1998  
2. The limited liability company shall not include as a single participant another economic company, 
consisting of a single person. 
Article 89. Constituent Documents of the Limited Liability Company 
1. The constituent documents of the limited liability company shall be the constituent agreement, 
signed by its participants, and the Rules, approved by them. If the company is set up by a single person, 
its constituent document shall be the Rules. 
2. The constituent documents of the limited liability company, in addition to the information, 
stipulated in Item 2 of Article 52 of the present Code, shall contain the terms on the amount of the 
company's capital; on the size of the shares of every participant; on the size, the structure, the term and 
the procedure for their making the investments, and on their responsibility for violating their duties, 
involved in the making of the investments; on the structure and the competence of the public management 
bodies and on the order of their adopting decisions, including on the issues, the decisions on which shall 
be adopted unanimously or by a qualified majority of votes; and also other information, stipulated by the 
Law on the Limited Liability Companies. 
Article 90. Authorized Capital of the Limited Liability Company 
1. The authorized capital of the limited liability company shall be comprised of the cost of its 
participants' contributions. 
The authorized capital of the limited liability company shall determine the minimum size of the 
company's property, guaranteeing the interests of its creditors. The authorized capital of the limited 
liability company shall not be less than the amount, stipulated by the Law on the Limited Liability 
Companies. 
Federal Law No. 138-FZ of July 8, 1999 reworded Item 2 of Article 90 of this Code 
See the previous text of the Item 
2. It is prohibited to relieve a stakeholder of the limited liability company from the obligation to 
make a contribution in the company's authorized capital, including but not limited to, accepting for offset 
claims to the company, excluding the cases provided by the law. 
3. By the moment of registration, not less than a half of the authorized capital of the limited liability 
company shall be paid up by its participants. The remaining underpaid part of the authorized capital shall 
be subject to payment by its participants in the course of the first year of the company's operation. In case 
of violating this obligation, the company shall either make a statement on the reduction of its authorized 
capital and register its reduction in conformity with the established procedure, or cease its activity by way 
of liquidation. 
4. If, on the expiry of the second or of every subsequent fiscal year, the cost of the net assets of the 
limited liability company proves to be less than its authorized capital, the company shall be obliged to 
make a statement on the reduction of its authorized capital and to register its reduction in conformity with 
the established procedure. In case the cost of the company's said assets falls below the law-stipulated 
minimum size of the authorized capital, the company shall be subject to liquidation. 
5. The reduction of the authorized capital of the limited liability company shall be admitted after all 
its creditors have been notified to this effect. In this case, the latter shall have the right to demand that the 
corresponding obligations of the company shall be discharged in advance and that their losses be 
recompensed. 
Federal Law No. 138-FZ of July 8, 1999 supplemented Item 5 of Article 90 of this Code with the 
following paragraph 
The rights and duties of the creditors of credit organizations set up on the form of a limited liability 
company shall also be governed by the laws governing the activities of credit organizations. 
6. The augmentation of the company's authorized capital shall be admitted after all its participants 
have made their investments in full volume. 
Article 91. Administration in the Limited Liability Company 
1. The higher body of the limited liability company shall be the general meeting of its participants. 
An executive body (collegiate and/or single-man) shall be set up in the limited liability company, 
which shall perform the current direction of its activity and which shall report to the general meeting of 
its participants. The single-man management body of the company may also be elected not from among 
its participants. 
2. The jurisdiction of the company's management bodies and the procedure, laid down for its 
adoption of decisions and coming out on behalf of the company, shall be defined in conformity with the 
present Code and with the Law on the Limited Liability Companies. 
3. To the exclusive jurisdiction of the general meeting of the limited liability company shall be 
referred: 
1) the amendment of the company's Rules and the change of the size of its authorized capital; 
2) the setting up of the company's executive bodies and an advanced termination of their powers; 
3) the approval of the company's annual reports and accounting balances and the distribution of its 
profits and losses; 
4) the adoption of the decision on the company's reorganization or liquidation; 
5) the election of the company's auditing committee (the auditor). 
The settlement of other questions may also be referred to the exclusive jurisdiction of the general 
meeting of the company's partners by Law on the Limited Liability Companies. 
The issues, referred to the exclusive jurisdiction of the general meeting of the company's 
participants, shall not be passed by it for adopting decisions to the company's executive body. 
4. For the purposes of checking up and confirming the correctness of the annual financial reports of 
the limited liability company, it shall have the right annually to draw on the services of a certified auditor, 
whose material interests are not involved in the company or connected with its participants (the external 
audit). The audit examination of the company's annual financial reports may also be carried out on the 
demand of any of its participants. 
The procedure for carrying out the audit examinations of the company's activities shall be defined 
by the law and by the company's Rules. 
5. The publication by the company of the results of the management of its activity (the public 
reports) shall not be required, with the exception of the cases, stipulated by the Law on the Limited 
Liability Companies. 
Article 92. Reorganization and Liquidation of the Limited Liability Company 
1. The limited liability company may be reorganized or liquidated voluntarily by a unanimous 
consent of its participants. 
The other grounds for the reorganization and liquidation of the limited liability company and the 
procedure for its reorganization and liquidation shall be defined by the present Code and by the other 
laws. 
2. The limited liability company shall have the right to transform itself into a joint-stock company or 
into a production cooperative. 
About the reorganization or liquidation of a limited liability company see Federal Law No. 14-FZ of 
February 8, 1998  
Article 93. Transfer of the Share in the Authorized Capital of the Limited 
Liability Company to a Third Person 
1. The participant of the limited liability company shall have the right to sell or cede in another 
manner his share in the company's authorized capital or a part thereof to one or several participants of the 
given company. 
2. The alienation by the participant of the company of his share (a part thereof) to third persons shall 
be admitted, unless otherwise stipulated by the company's Rules. 
The participants of the company shall enjoy the right of priority in acquiring the share of its 
participant (or a part thereof) proportionately to the size of their own shares, unless the other order for 
exercising this right is stipulated by the company's Rules or by an agreement between its participants. In 
case the company's participants do not avail themselves of their preferential right within a month's term 
from the date of notification or within the other term, stipulated by the company's Rules or by the 
agreement between its participants, the participant's share may be alienated in favour of a third person. 
3. If, in conformity with the Rules of the limited liability company, the alienation of the participant's 
share (a part thereof) to third persons is inadmissible, while its other participants refuse to acquire it, the 
company shall be obliged to pay to the participant in question the actual cost of, or to give him in kind, 
the amount of property, which would correspond to such cost. 
4. The share of the participant of the limited liability company may be alienated up to its full 
payment only in that part of it, which has already been paid. 
5. In the participant's share (a part thereof) has been acquired by the limited liability company itself, 
it shall be obliged to realize it to its other participants or to third persons within the term and in 
conformity with the order, stipulated by the Law on the Limited Liability Companies and by the 
company's constituent documents, or to reduce its authorized capital in conformity with Items 4 and 5 of 
Article 90 of the present Code. 
6. The shares of the authorized capital of the limited liability company shall be transferred to the 
citizens' heirs and to the legal successors of the legal entities, which have been the company's participants, 
unless the constituent documents of the company stipulate that such transfer shall be admitted only upon 
the consent of the rest of the company's participants. The refusal to grant the consent to the transfer of the 
share shall entail the obligation of the company to pay up to the heirs (the legal successors) of the 
participant the actual cost of his share, or to give them in kind the property, that would amount to such 
cost, in conformity with the order and on the terms, stipulated by the Law on the Limited Liability 
Companies and by the company's constituent documents. 
Article 94. Withdrawal of the Participant of the Limited Liability Company from 
the Company 
The participant of the limited liability company shall have the right to retire from the company 
regardless of the consent of its other participants. In this case, he shall be entitled to being paid up the cost 
of the part of the property, corresponding to the size of his share in the company's authorized capital in 
the order, in the manner and within the term, stipulated by the Law on the Limited liability Companies 
and by the company's constituent documents. 
5. The Double Liability Company 
Article 95. The Basic Provisions on the Double Liability Companies 
1. The double liability company shall be recognized as the company, established by one or by 
several persons, whose capital is divided into the shares of the size, defined by the company's constituent 
documents; the participants of such a company shall bear in common the subsidiary liability by its 
obligations with their property in the amount, divisible by the cost of their contributions, equal for all of 
them, which shall be defined by the company's constituent documents. In case of the bankruptcy of one of 
the participants, his liability by the company's obligations shall be distributed among the rest of the 
participants proportionately to their contributions, unless the other order for the liability sharing is 
stipulated by the company's constituent documents. 
2. The trade name of the double liability company shall contain the name of the company and the 
words " double liability". 
3. Toward the double liability company shall be applied the rules of the present Code on the limited 
liability company, unless otherwise stipulated by the present Article. 
6. The Joint-Stock Company 
Article 96. The Basic Provisions on the Joint-Stock Company 
1. The joint-stock company shall be recognized as the company, whose authorized capital is divided 
into a definite number of shares; the participants of the joint-stock company (the share-holders) shall not 
be answerable by its obligations and shall take the risks, involved in the losses in connection with its 
activity, within the cost of the shares in their possession. 
The share-holders, who have not paid up their shares in full, shall bear the joint responsibility by the 
obligations of the joint-stock company within the unpaid part of the cost of the shares in their possession. 
2. The trade name of the joint-stock company shall contain its name and the indication of the fact 
that the company is a joint-stock one. 
3. The legal status of the joint-stock company and the rights and duties of the share-holders shall be 
defined in conformity with the present Code and with the Law on the Joint-Stock Companies. 
See Federal Law No. 208-FZ of December 26, 1995 on Joint-stock Companies, Federal Law of the 
Russian Federation No. 115-FZ of July 19, 1998 on the Specifics of the Legal Position of the Workers' 
Joint-Stock Companies (the People's Enterprises) 
The specifics of the legal status of the joint-stock companies, founded by way of the privatization of 
the state-run and municipal enterprises, shall be also defined by the laws and by the other legal acts on the 
privatization of these enterprises. 
Federal Law No. 138-FZ of July 8, 1999 supplemented Item 3 of Article 96 of this Code with the 
following paragraph 
The peculiarities of the legal status of the credit organizations set up in the form 
of a joint-stock company, the rights and duties of the shareholders thereof shall also be 
provided by the laws governing the activities of credit organizations. 
Article 97. The Open and Closed Joint-Stock Companies 
1. The joint-stock company, whose participants may alienate the shares in their possession without 
the consent of the other share-holders, shall be recognized as an open joint-stock company. This kind of 
the joint-stock company shall have the right to carry out a public subscription for the shares it issues and 
to sell them freely on the terms, fixed by the law and by the other legal acts. 
The open joint-stock company shall be obliged every year to publish for general information an 
annual report, an accounting balance and also an account on the profits and the losses. 
2. The joint-stock company, whose shares are distributed only among its founders or within another 
circle of persons, defined in advance, shall be recognized as a closed joint-stock company. Such a 
company shall not have the right to carry out a public subscription for the shares it issues or to offer them 
in any other way for acquisition to an unlimited circle of persons. 
The share-holders of the closed joint-stock company shall enjoy a preferential right to acquire the 
shares offered for sale by the other share-holders of this company. 
The number of the participants of the closed joint-stock company shall not exceed that fixed by the 
Law on the Joint-Stock Companies; otherwise, it shall be subject to the transformation into an open joint
stock company in the course of one year, and upon the expiry of this term - to the liquidation by the court 
ruling, if the number of its participants has not been reduced to the law-stipulated limit. 
In the cases, stipulated by the Law on the Joint-Stock Companies, the closed joint-stock company 
may be obliged to publish for general information the documents, indicated in Item 1 of the present 
Article. 
Article 98. The Founding of the Joint-Stock Company 
1. The founders of the joint-stock company shall sign between themselves an agreement, defining 
the order of their performing a joint activity, involved in the establishment of the company,the size of its 
authorized capital, the categories of the shares it is going to issue and the way of their distribution, and 
also the other terms, stipulated by the Law on the Joint-Stock Companies. 
The agreement on founding a joint-stock company shall be made out in written form. 
2. The founders of the joint-stock company shall bear a joint responsibility by the obligations, which 
have arisen before the company's registration. 
The company shall bear responsibility by the founders' obligations, related to its creation, only in 
case their actions have been subsequently approved by the general meeting of the share-holders. 
3. The constituent documents of the joint-stock company shall be its Rules, approved by the 
founders. 
The Rules of the joint-stock company, in addition to the information, specified in Item 2 of Article 
52 of the present Code, shall contain the terms on the categories of the shares, issued by the company, on 
their face value and number; on the size of the company's authorized capital; on the rights of the share
holders; on the structure and the jurisdiction of the company's management bodies and on the procedure, 
laid down for their decision-making, including on the issues, on which decisions shall be adopted 
unanimously or by a qualified majority of votes. The Rules of the joint-stock company shall also contain 
other information, stipulated by the Law on the Joint-Stock Companies. 
4. The procedure for the performance of the other actions, involved in founding a joint-stock 
company, including the jurisdiction of the constituent assembly, shall be defined by the Law on the Joint
Stock Companies. 
5. The specifics of the creation of the joint-stock companies as a result of the privatization of the 
state-run and the municipal enterprises shall be defined by the laws and by the other legal acts on the 
privatization of these enterprises. 
6. The joint-stock company may be founded by one person, or it may consist of one person in case a 
single share-holder acquires all the company's shares. The data to this effect shall be contained in the 
company's Rules, shall be registered and published for general information. 
The joint-stock company shall not have the right to enlist another economic company, consisting of 
a single person, as its only participant. 
Article 99. The Authorized Capital of the Joint-Stock Company 
1. The authorized capital of the joint-stock company shall be comprised of the face value of the 
company's shares, acquired by the share-holders. 
The company's authorized capital shall define the minimum amount of the company's property, 
guaranteeing the interests of its creditors. It shall not be less than it is stipulated by the Law on the Joint
Stock Companies. 
2. The share-holder shall not be exempted from the duty to pay for the company's shares, including 
the exemption from this duty by taking into account his claims against the company. 
3. The public subscription for the shares of the joint-stock company shall not be admitted until the 
authorized capital is paid up in full. When founding a joint-stock company, all its shares shall be 
distributed among the founders. 
4. If upon the expiry of the second and of each of the next fiscal years the cost of the company's net 
assets proves to be less than its authorized capital, the company shall be obliged to declare and to register, 
in conformity with the established procedure, the reduction of its authorized capital. If the cost of the said 
company's assets falls below the minimum size of the authorized capital, fixed by the law (Item 1 of the 
present Article), the company shall be subject to liquidation. 
5. The law or the Rules of the company may fix the limits upon the number, the total face value of 
its shares or the maximum number of the votes in the possession of a single share-holder. 
Article 100. Augmentation of the Capital of the Joint-Stock Company 
1. The joint-stock company shall have the right, by the decision of the general meeting of the share
holders, to inflate its authorized capital by raising the face value of its shares or by issuing additional 
shares. 
2. The augmentation of the authorized capital of the joint-stock company shall be admitted after it 
has been paid up in full. The augmentation of the company's authorized capital for the purpose of 
covering its losses shall not be admitted. 
3. In the cases, stipulated by the Law on the Joint-Stock Companies, the company's Rules may 
establish the preferential right of the share-holders, possessing ordinary (common) shares or the other 
kind of the voting shares, for acquiring the shares, additionally issued by the company. 
Article 101. Reduction of the Authorized Capital of the Joint-Stock Company 
1. The joint-stock company shall have the right, by the decision of the general meeting of the share
holders, to deflate its authorized capital by cutting down the face value of its shares, or by buying up a 
certain number of the shares in order to reduce their total number. 
The deflation of the company's authorized capital shall be admitted after the notification of all its 
creditors in conformity with the procedure, laid down by the Law on the Joint-Stock Companies. The 
creditors of the company shall have the right to demand that the company terminate in advance or execute 
its corresponding obligations and recompense their losses. 
Federal Law No. 138-FZ of July 8, 1999 supplemented Item 1 of Article 101 of this Code with the 
following paragraph 
The rights and duties of the creditors of credit organizations set up in the form of a joint-stock 
company shall also be provided by the laws governing the activities of credit organizations. 
2. The reduction of the authorized capital of the joint-stock company by acquiring and paying off a 
part of the shares shall be admitted in case this possibility has been stipulated in the company's Rules. 
Article 102. Restrictions on the Issue of Securities and on the Payment of 
Dividends of the Joint-Stock Company 
1. The proportion of the preference shares in the total volume of the authorized capital of the joint
stock company shall not exceed 25 per cent. 
Federal Law No. 192-FZ of December 29, 2004 amended Item 2 of Article 102 of this Code  
See the text of the Item in the previous wording 
2. The joint-stock company shall have the right to issue bonds to the sum, not exceeding the size of 
the authorized capital or the amount of the security, provided for this purpose by the third persons, after 
the authorized capital has been paid up in full. In the absence of the security, the bond issue shall not be 
admitted until the third year of the joint-stock company's existence and on condition that by this time its 
two annual balances have been properly approved. The indicated restrictions on the issuance of bonds 
shall not apply to the issuance of bonds with a mortgage cover.  
3. The joint-stock company shall not have the right to declare and pay dividends: - until the entire authorized capital is paid up in full; - if the cost of the net assets of the joint-stock company is less than its authorized capital and its 
reserve fund, or if it will fall below their size as a result of the payment of the dividends. 
Article 103. Management in the Joint-Stock Company 
1. The higher management body of the joint-stock company shall be the general meeting of its 
share-holders. 
See also Decision of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation No. 12 of October 
10, 2001  
Within the exclusive jurisdiction of the general meeting of the share-holders shall be placed: 
1) the amendment of the company's Rules, including the change of the size of its authorized capital; 
2) the election of the members of the board of directors (the supervisory council) and of the auditing 
commission (the auditor) of the company, and the termination of their powers before the expiry of their 
term of office; 
3) the formation of the company's executive bodies and the cessation of their powers before the 
expiry of their term of office, unless the company's Rules refer the resolution of these issues to the 
jurisdiction of the board of directors (the supervisory council); 
4) the approval of the annual reports, the accounting balances and the accounts of the company's 
profits and losses, and the distribution of its profits and losses; 
5) the adoption of the decision on the company's reorganization or liquidation. 
The Law on the Joint-Stock Companies may also refer to the exclusive jurisdiction of the general 
meeting of the share-holders the resolution of the other issues. 
The issues, placed by the law within the exclusive jurisdiction of the general meeting of the share
holders, shall not be turned over by it for resolution to the company's executive bodies. 
2. In the company with over 50 share-holders, a board of directors (a supervisory council) shall be 
established. 
Concerning management of the company with less than 50 share-holders see Federal Law No. 208-FZ 
of December 26, 1995 
In case of the establishment of the board of directors (the supervisory council), the company's Rules, 
in conformity with the Law on the Joint-Stock Companies, shall delineate the scope of its exclusive 
jurisdiction. The issues, placed by the Rules within the exclusive jurisdiction of the board of directors (the 
supervisory council), shall not be turned over by it for resolution to the company's executive bodies. 
3. The company's executive body may be collegiate (the board, the directorate) and (or) single-man 
(the director, the director-general). It shall effect the current management of the company's activity and 
shall report to the board of directors (to the supervisory council) and to the general meeting of the share
holders. 
To the jurisdiction of the company's executive body shall be referred the resolution of all issues, 
which are not placed within the exclusive jurisdiction of the other management bodies of the company, 
delineated by the law or by the company's Rules. 
By the decision of the general meeting of the share-holders, the powers of the company's executive 
body may be turned over by an agreement to another commercial organization, or to an individual 
businessman (manager). 
4. The jurisdiction of the management bodies of the joint-stock company and the procedure for their 
adopting decisions and acting on behalf of the company shall be defined in conformity with the present 
Code by the Law on the Joint-Stock Companies and by the company's Rules. 
5. The joint-stock company, which has been obliged, in conformity with the present Code or with 
the Law on the Joint-Stock Companies, to publish for general information the documents, indicated in 
Item 1 of Article 97 of the present Code, shall annually draw upon the services of a professional auditor, 
not bound up with the company or with its participants by property interests, for checking upon and 
confirming the correctness of the company's annual financial reports. 
The auditor's examination of the activity of the joint-stock company, including of the company, 
which has not been obliged to publish for general information the said documents, shall be carried out at 
any time upon the demand of the share-holders, whose aggregate share of the authorized capital 
comprises 10 or more per cent. 
The procedure for carrying out auditor's examinations of the activity of the joint-stock company 
shall be defined by the law and by the company's Rules. 
Article 104. Reorganization and Liquidation of the Joint-Stock Company 
1. The joint-stock company may be reorganized or liquidated voluntarily, by the decision of the 
general meeting of the share-holders. 
The other grounds and the procedure for the reorganization and liquidation of the joint-stock 
company shall be stipulated by the present Code and by the other laws. 
Federal Law No. 138-FZ of July 8, 1999 amended Item 2 of Article 104 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
2. The joint-stock company shall have the right to transform itself into a limited liability company or 
into a production cooperative and also to a non-commercial organization in compliance with the law. 
Concerning reorganization of joint-stock companies see Federal Law No. 208-FZ of December 26, 
1995 
7. The Subsidiary and Dependent Companies 
Article 105. The Subsidiary Economic Company 
1. The economic company shall be recognized as subsidiary, if the other (the parent) economic 
company or partnership, on account of its prevalent participation in its authorized capital, or in 
conformity with the agreement, signed between them, or in any other way, can exert a decisive impact on 
the decisions, adopted by such a company. 
2. The subsidiary company shall not be answerable by the debts of the parent company (the 
partnership). 
The parent company (the partnership), which has the right to issue to the subsidiary company, 
including by an agreement signed with it, the instructions that are obligatory for it, shall bear joint 
responsibility with the subsidiary company by the deals, effected by the latter in execution of such 
instructions. 
In case of the insolvency (the bankruptcy) of the subsidiary company through the fault of the parent 
company (the partnership), the latter shall bear the subsidiary responsibility by its debts. 
3. The participants (the share-holders) of the subsidiary company shall have the right to claim that 
the losses, caused to the subsidiary company through the fault of the parent company (the partnership), 
shall be recompensed to them by the latter, unless otherwise stipulated by the laws on the economic 
companies. 
Article 106. The Dependent Economic Company 
1. The economic company shall be recognized as dependent, if the other (the prevalent, the 
participant) company possesses over 20 per cent of the voting shares of the joint-stock company or over 
20 per cent of the authorized capital of the limited liability company. 
2. The economic company, which has acquired over 20 per cent of the voting shares of the joint
stock company, or over 20 per cent of the authorized capital of the limited liability company, shall be 
obliged to publish information to this effect without delay and in conformity with the procedure, 
stipulated by the laws on the economic companies. 
3. The limits of the mutual participation of the economic companies in one another's authorized 
capitals and the number of the votes that one such company may use at the general meeting of the 
participants or of the share-holders of another company, shall be defined by the law. 
_ 3. The Production Cooperatives 
Article 107. The Concept of the Production Cooperative 
1. The production cooperative (the artel) shall be recognized as a voluntary association of the 
citizens, based on the membership and set up for the purpose of the joint production or of the other kind 
of the economic activity (the manufacture, processing and sale of the industrial, farming and the other 
kind of produce, the performance of works, the trade, the rendering of everyday and other services), based 
on their personal labour and on the other kind of participation and on the putting together by its members 
(participants) of the property participation shares. The law and the constituent documents of the 
production cooperative may stipulate the participation in its activity of the legal entities. The production 
cooperative shall be a commercial organization. 
2. The members of the production cooperative shall bear the subsidiary responsibility by the 
cooperative's obligations in the amount and in conformity with the procedure, stipulated by the Law on 
the Production Cooperatives and by the Rules of the production cooperative. 
Concerning the amounts of the subsidiary responsibility see 
Federal Law No. 193-FZ of December 8, 1995  
Federal Law No. 41-FZ of May 8, 1996 on Production Cooperatives  
3. The trade name of the cooperative shall contain its name and the words "production cooperative" 
or "artel". 
4. The legal status of the production cooperatives and the rights and duties of their members shall be 
defined by the laws on the production cooperatives in conformity with the present Code. 
See Federal Law No. 41-FZ of May 8, 1996 on Production Cooperatives 
Concerning agricultural production cooperatives see Federal Law No. 193-FZ of December 8, 1995 
Article 108. Formation of the Production Cooperative 
1. The constituent document of the production cooperative shall be its Rules, endorsed by the 
general meeting of its members. 
Concerning the requirements to the Rules of productive cooperative see Federal Law No. 41-FZ of 
May 8, 1996 on Production Cooperatives  
Concerning the requirements to the Rules of agricultural cooperative see Federal Law No. 193-FZ of 
December 8, 1995 
2. The Rules of the production cooperative shall contain, in addition to the data, indicated in Item 2 
of Article 52 of the present Code, the terms for the size of the share contributions to be made by the 
cooperative members; for the structure and the order of making the share contributions by the cooperative 
members and for their liability in case of violating the obligation on making the share contributions; for 
the nature and the order of the labour participation by its members in the cooperative's activity and for 
their liability in case of violating the obligation on the personal labour participation; for the order of the 
distribution of the cooperative's profits and losses; for the size of and the terms for the subsidiary liability 
of its members by the cooperative's debts; for the structure and the scope of jurisdiction of the 
cooperative's management bodies and the order of their decision-making, including on the issues, the 
decisions on which shall be adopted unanimously or by a qualified majority of votes. 
3. The number of cooperative members shall be not less than 5 persons. 
Article 109. The Property of the Production Cooperative 
1. The property in the possession of the production cooperative shall be divided into the shares of its 
members in conformity with the Rules of the cooperative. 
The Rules of the cooperative may decree that a certain part of the property in the possession of the 
cooperative shall be comprised of the indivisible funds, which shall be used for the purposes, defined by 
the Rules. 
The decision on the setting up of the indivisible funds shall be adopted by the cooperative members 
unanimously, unless otherwise stipulated by the Rules of the cooperative. 
2. The member of the cooperative shall be obliged to put in, by the moment of the cooperative's 
registration, not less than 10 per cent of his share contributions; the rest shall be paid up in the course of 
one year from the moment of the cooperative's registration. 
3. The cooperative shall not have the right to issue shares. 
4. The profit of the cooperative shall be distributed among its members in accordance with their 
labour input, unless otherwise stipulated by the law and by the Rules of the cooperative. 
Concerning distribution of cooperative's profit see Federal Law No. 41-FZ of May 8, 1996 on 
Production Cooperatives  
The property, left after the cooperative's liquidation and the satisfaction of the claims of its creditors, 
shall be distributed in the same order. 
Article 110. Management in the Production Cooperatives 
1. The higher management body of the cooperative shall be the general meeting of its members. 
In the cooperative with over 50 members, a supervisory council may be established, which shall 
exert control over the activity of the cooperative's executive body. 
The cooperative's executive bodies shall be its management board and (or) its chairman. They shall 
effect the current leadership of the cooperative's activity and shall report to the supervisory council and to 
the general meeting of the cooperative members. 
Only the members of the cooperative shall have the right to be the members of the supervisory 
council and to fill the post of the chairman of the cooperative. The member of the cooperative shall not be 
simultaneously a member of the supervisory council and a member of the management board or the 
chairman of the cooperative. 
2. The jurisdiction of the management bodies of the cooperative and the order for their decision
making shall be defined by the law and by the Rules of the cooperative. 
See Federal Law No. 41-FZ of May 8, 1996 on Production Cooperatives  
3. The following functions shall be placed within the exclusive jurisdiction of the general meeting of 
the members of the cooperative: 
1) the amendment of the Rules of the cooperative; 
2) the establishment of the supervisory council and the termination of the powers of its members, 
and also the establishment and the termination of the powers of the cooperative's executive bodies, unless 
in conformity with the Rules of the cooperative this right has been vested in its supervisory council; 
3) the admittance and expelling of the cooperative members; 
4) the approval of the cooperative's annual reports and accounting balances and the distribution of 
its profits and losses; 
5) the decision on the cooperative's reorganization and liquidation. 
The Law on the Production Cooperatives and the Rules of the cooperative may also place other 
issues within the exclusive jurisdiction of the general meeting. 
The issues, placed within the exclusive jurisdiction of the general meeting or of the supervisory 
council of the cooperative, shall not be turned over by these for resolution to the cooperative's executive 
bodies. 
4. The member of the cooperative shall be entitled to one vote in the adoption of decisions by the 
general meeting. 
Article 111. Termination of the Membership in the Production Cooperative and 
the Transfer of the Share 
1. The member of the cooperative shall have the right, at his own discretion, to withdraw from the 
cooperative. In this case, he shall be paid out the cost of his share or issued the property, corresponding to 
his share; he shall also be entitled to certain other payments, stipulated by the Rules of the cooperative. 
The payment out of the cost of the share or the issue of the other property to the retiring member of 
the cooperative shall be effected upon the expiry of the fiscal year and the approval of the accounting 
balance of the cooperative, unless otherwise stipulated by the Rules of the cooperative. 
2. The member of the cooperative may be expelled from the cooperative by the decision of the 
general meeting in case of his non-performance or an improper performance of his duties, imposed upon 
him by the Rules of the cooperative, and also in the other cases, stipulated by the law and by the Rules. 
Concerning the basics of expelling from the members of the cooperative see Federal Law No. 41-FZ of 
May 8, 1996 on Production Cooperatives  
The member of the supervisory council or of the executive body may be expelled from the 
cooperative by the decision of the general meeting in connection with his membership in a similar 
cooperative. 
The expelled member of the cooperative shall have the right to get back his share contribution and 
to receive certain other payments, stipulated by the Rules of the cooperative, in conformity with Item 1 of 
the present Article. 
3. The member of the cooperative shall have the right to turn over his share or a part thereof to 
another member of the cooperative, unless otherwise stipulated by the law and by the Rules of the 
cooperative. 
The turning over of the share (a part thereof) to the citizen, who is not a member of the cooperative, 
shall be admitted only upon the consent of the cooperative. In this case, the other members of the 
cooperative shall have the right of priority to the purchase of such a share (a part thereof). 
4. In case of the death of a member of the production cooperative, his heirs may be admitted to the 
cooperative's membership, unless otherwise stipulated by the Rules of the cooperative. If this is not the 
case, the cooperative shall pay out to the heirs the cost of the share of the deceased member of the 
cooperative. 
5. The turning of the claim for the property onto the share of the member of the production 
cooperative by the own debts of the cooperative member shall be admitted only in case his own property 
proves to be insufficient for covering such debts, in conformity with the order, stipulated by the law and 
by the Rules of the cooperative. The claim by the debts of the cooperative member shall not be turned 
onto the indivisible funds of the cooperative. 
Article 112. Reorganization and Liquidation of the Production Cooperatives 
1. The production cooperative may be reorganized or liquidated voluntarily, by the decision of the 
general meeting of its members. 
The other grounds and the procedure for the reorganization and the liquidation of the cooperative 
shall be defined by the present Code and by the other laws. 
2. By the unanimous decision of its members, the production cooperative may transform itself into 
an economic partnership or into a company. 
Concerning reorganization and liquidation of cooperatives see also Federal Law No. 41-FZ of May 8, 
1996 on Production Cooperatives  
_ 4. The State-Run and Municipal Unitary Enterprises 
Article 113. The Unitary Enterprise 
1. The unitary enterprise shall be recognized as a commercial organization, not endowed with the 
right of ownership to the property, allotted to it by the property owner. The unitary enterprise's property 
shall be indivisible and shall not be distributed according to the instalments (the participation shares, the 
shares), including among the workers of the given enterprise. 
Federal Law No. 161-FZ of November 14, 2002 amended paragraph 2 of Item 1 of Article 113 of this 
Code 
See the previous text of the paragraph 
The Rules of the unitary enterprise shall contain, in addition to the information, indicated in Item 2 
of Article 52 of the present Code, that on the subject and on the goals of the enterprise's activity, and also 
on the size of its authorized fund and on the order and the sources of its formation, except for treasury 
enterprises. 
Only the state-run and the municipal enterprises shall be set up in the form of unitary enterprises. 
2. The property of the state-run or the municipal unitary enterprise shall correspondingly be in the 
state or in the municipal ownership, and shall belong to such an enterprise by the right of economic or 
operative management. 
3. The trade name of the unitary enterprise shall contain an indication of the owner of its property. 
4. The unitary enterprise shall be managed by its head, who shall be appointed either by the owner 
or by the owner's authorized body, and shall report to these. 
5. The unitary enterprise shall be answerable by its obligations with the entire property in its 
possession. 
The unitary enterprise shall not bear responsibility by the obligations of the owner of its property. 
6. The legal status of the state-run and municipal unitary enterprises shall be defined by the present 
Code and by the Law on the State-Run and Municipal Unitary Enterprises. 
Federal Law No. 161-FZ of November 14, 2002 amended Article 114 of this Code 
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 114. The Unitary Enterprise, Based on the Right of Economic 
Management 
See also the Concept for Reforming Enterprises and Other Commercial Organizations endorsed by the 
Decision of the Government of the Russian Federation No. 1373 of October 30, 1997  
1. The unitary enterprise, based on the right of economic management, shall be set up by the 
decision of the state or the local self-government body, authorized for this purpose. 
2. The constituent document of the enterprise, based on the right of economic management, shall be 
its Rules, approved by the state body or by the local self-government body. 
3. The size of the authorized fund of the enterprise, based on the right of economic management, 
shall not be less than that fixed by the Law on the State-Run and Municipal Unitary Enterprises. 
4. The procedure for forming up the authorised fund of an enterprise founded by the right of 
economic jurisdiction shall be determined by a law on state and municipal unitary enterprises. 
5. If upon the expiry of the fiscal year the cost of the net assets of the enterprise, based on the right 
of economic management, proves to be less than the size of its authorized fund, the body, authorized to 
set up such enterprises, shall be obliged to effect, in conformity with the established procedure, the 
reduction of the authorized fund. If the cost of the net assets falls below the law-fixed amount, the 
enterprise may be liquidated by the court decision. 
6. In case the decision has been adopted on the reduction of the authorized fund, the enterprise shall 
be obliged to inform about it its creditors in written form. 
The creditor of the enterprise shall have the right to demand that the obligations, by which the given 
enterprise is the debtor, be terminated or executed in advance and that his losses be recompensed. 
7. The owner of the property of the enterprise, based on the right of economic management, shall 
not be answerable by the enterprise's obligations, with the exception of the cases, stipulated in Item 3 of 
Article 56 of the present Code. This rule shall also apply to the liability of the enterprise, which has 
founded the subsidiary enterprise, by the latter's obligations. 
Federal Law No. 161-FZ of November 14, 2002 reworded Article 115 of this Code 
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 115. The Unitary Enterprise Founded by the Right of Operative 
Management 
1. In the cases and in the manner envisaged by a law on state and municipal unitary enterprise a 
unitary enterprise may be founded by the right of operative management (treasury enterprise) on the basis 
of state or municipal property. 
2. The constitutive document of the treasury enterprise shall be its constitution approved by the state 
or local governmental body authorised to do so. 
3. The company name of a unitary enterprise founded by the right of operative management shall 
contain an indication of the fact that this enterprise is a treasury enterprise. 
4. The rights of a treasury enterprise to the property consolidated thereto shall be determined 
according to Articles 296 and 297 of the present Code and by a law on state and municipal unitary 
enterprises. 
5. The owner of property of a treasury enterprise shall bear subsidiary liability for the obligations of 
the enterprise if its property is insufficient. 
6. The treasury enterprise may be reconstructed or liquidated in compliance with the law on state 
and municipal unitary enterprises. 
_ 5. The Non-Profit Organizations 
See also Federal Law No. 7-FZ of January 12, 1996 on Nonprofit  
Organizations 
Article 116. The Consumer Cooperative 
1. The consumer cooperative shall be recognized as a voluntary association of the citizens and the 
legal entities, based on membership and aimed at satisfying the participants' material and other needs by 
its members putting together their property share contributions. 
2. The Rules of the consumer cooperative shall contain, in addition to the information indicated in 
Item 2 of Article 52 of the present Code, the terms for the size of the share contributions, made by the 
members of the cooperative; for the structure and the order of making the share contributions by the 
members of the cooperative, and for the responsibility they shall bear for violating the obligation, 
involved in making the share contributions; for the composition and the scope of authority of the 
cooperative management bodies, and for the order of their decision-making, including on the issues, with 
respect to which decisions shall be adopted unanimously or by a qualified majority of votes; and also for 
the procedure, laid down for covering the losses the cooperative has sustained, by its members. 
3. The name of the consumer cooperative shall contain an indication of the main purpose of its 
activity, and also the word "cooperative", or the words "consumer union" or "consumer company". 
4. The members of the consumer cooperative shall be obliged, in the course of 3 months after the 
approval of its annual balance, to cover the sustained losses by making new contributions. In case of the 
non-fulfillment of this duty, the cooperative may be liquidated by the court decision upon the creditor's 
demand. 
The members of the consumer cooperative shall bear the joint subsidiary liability by its obligations 
within the unpaid part of the additional contribution of every one of the cooperative members. 
5. The incomes, derived by the consumer cooperative as a result of the business activity, performed 
by the cooperative in conformity with the law and with its Rules, shall be distributed among its members. 
6. The legal status of the consumer cooperatives, and the rights and duties of their members shall be 
defined in conformity with the present Code and with the Law on the Consumer Cooperatives. 
On Citizens' Credit Consumer Co-Operatives see Federal Law No. 117-FZ of August 7, 2001  
Federal Law No. 97-FZ of June 11, 1997 reworded the Law of the Russian Federation on the 
Consumer Cooperation in the Russian Federation  
Concerning agricultural consumer cooperatives see Federal Law No. 193-FZ of December 8, 1995 
Article 117. The Public and Religious Organizations (Associations) 
Concerning the legal status of public and religious organizations see Federal Law No. 7-FZ of 
January 12, 1996 on Nonprofit Organizations 
1. The public and religious organizations (associations) shall be interpreted as the voluntary 
associations of the citizens, who have united in the law-stipulated order on the basis of the community of 
their interests for the purpose of satisfying their spiritual or other non-material needs. 
The public and religious organizations shall be non-profit organizations. They shall have the right to 
engage in the business activity only in order to attain the goals, in the name of which they have been set 
up, and of the nature, consonant with these goals. 
2. The participants (members) of the public and religious organizations shall not retain the right to 
the property, which they have passed into the possession of these organizations, including to the 
membership dues. They shall not be answerable by the obligations of the public and religious 
organizations, in which they participate in the capacity of their members, while the said organizations 
shall not be answerable by the obligations of their members. 
3. The specifics of the legal status of the public and religious organizations as the participants of the 
relations, regulated by the present Code, shall be defined by the law. 
Concerning specifics of the legal status of the public organizations as the participants of the relations 
see Federal Law No. 82-FZ of May 19, 1995 on Public Associations 
Article 118. The Funds 
See also Federal Law No. 7-FZ of January 12, 1996 on Nonprofit  
Organizations 
1. The fund shall be interpreted for the purposes of the present Code as a non-membership non
profit organization, instituted by the citizens and (or) the legal entities on the basis of voluntary property 
contributions and pursuing the public, charity, cultural, educational or the other socially useful goals. 
The property, transferred to the fund by its founders (founder), shall be the fund's property. The 
founders shall not be answerable by the obligations of the fund they have created, while the fund shall not 
be answerable by the obligations of its founders. 
2. The fund shall use the property for the purposes, defined in its Rules. The fund shall have the 
right to engage in business activities, necessary for it to attain the socially useful goals, in the name of 
which the fund has been established, and of the kind consonant with these goals. To perform the business 
activity, the funds shall have the right to set up economic companies or to take part in these. 
The fund shall be obliged to annually publish reports on the use of its property. 
3. The procedure for the fund's management and for the setting up of its bodies shall be defined by 
its Rules, approved by its founders. 
4. The Rules of the fund, in addition to the information, indicated in Item 2 of Article 52 of the 
present Code, shall also contain: the name of the fund, including the word "fund"; the information on the 
fund's goal; the data on the fund's bodies, including on the board of guardians, supervising its activities, 
on the order of appointing and relieving the fund's official persons, on the place of the fund's location, and 
on the fate of the fund's property in case of its liquidation. 
About information additionally included into the charter of the mutual credit fund and rental fund set 
up by gardening, vegetable-growing and country cottage non-profit associations see Federal Law No. 
66-FZ of April 15, 1998  
Article 119. Amendment of the Rules and the Liquidation of the Fund 
1. The Rules of the fund may be amended by the fund's bodies, if the possibility of their amendment 
in this way has been stipulated by the Rules. 
If maintaining the Rules intact is fraught with the consequences, which it was impossible to foresee 
when the fund was established, but the possibility of introducing amendments into the Rules has not been 
stipulated by the latter, or the Rules are not amendable by the authorized persons, the right to effect such 
amendments shall be vested in the court upon the application of the fund's bodies or the body, authorized 
to exert supervision over its activities. 
2. The decision on the liquidation of the fund shall be adopted only by the court upon the application 
of the interested persons. 
The fund may be liquidated: 
1) if the fund's property is insufficient to attain its goals, and there is no realistic hope that the 
property it needs may be received; 
2) if the fund's stipulated goals cannot be achieved, while they cannot be amended; 
3) if in its activities the fund deviates from the goals, stipulated in its Rules; 
4) in the other law-stipulated cases. 
3. In case of the fund's liquidation, its property, left after the creditors' claims have been satisfied, 
shall be directed towards the achievement of the goals, pointed out in its Rules. 
Article 120. The Institutions 
1. The institution shall be recognized as an organization, established by the owner for the 
performance of the managerial, the socio-cultural or the other kind of functions of the non-profit nature 
and financed by him in full or in part. 
The rights of the institution to the property, assigned to it, shall be defined in conformity with 
Article 296 of the present Code. 
2. The institution shall be answerable by its obligations with the monetary means at its disposal. In 
case these are insufficient, the subsidiary liability by its obligations shall be borne by the owner of the 
corresponding property. 
3. The specifics of the legal status of the individual kinds of the state-run and of the other 
institutions shall be defined by the law and by the other legal acts. 
See Federal Law No. 7-FZ of January 12, 1996 on Nonprofit Organizations 
Article 121. Amalgamations of the Legal Entities (the Associations and the 
Unions) 
1. The commercial organizations shall have the right, by an agreement between themselves, to 
establish amalgamations in the form of associations or unions, which shall be non-profit organizations, 
for the purposes of coordinating their business activities and of representing and protecting their common 
property interests. 
If, by the decision of its participants, upon the given association (union) has been imposed the 
performance of business activities, such an association (union) shall be transformed into an economic 
company or into a partnership in accordance with the procedure, stipulated by the present Code, or it shall 
set up a commercial company for the performance of business activities, or shall participate in such a 
company. 
2. The public and the other kind of the non-profit organizations, including the institutions, shall have 
the right to voluntarily unite into the associations (the unions) of these organizations. 
The association (the union) of non-profit organizations shall be a non-profit organization. 
3. The members of the association (the union) shall retain their independence and the rights of a 
legal entity. 
4. The association (the union) shall not be answerable by the obligations of its members. The 
members of the association (the union) shall bear the subsidiary liability by its obligations in the amount 
and in accordance with the order, stipulated by the constituent documents of the given association. 
5. The name of the association (the union) shall contain an indication of the main object of its 
members' activities, with the word "association" or "union" included into it. 
Concerning amalgamations of the legal entities in the forms of nonprofit organizations see Federal 
Law No. 7-FZ of January 12, 1996 
Article 122. Constituent Documents of the Associations and the Unions 
1. The constituent documents of the association (the union) shall be the constituent agreement, 
signed by its members, and the Rules approved by them. 
2. The constituent documents of the association (the union) shall contain, in addition to the 
information indicated in Item 2 of Article 52 of the present Code, the terms for the composition and the 
authority of the management bodies of the association (the union) and for the order of their decision
making, including on the issues, the decisions on which shall be adopted unanimously or by a qualified 
majority of the votes of the association (the union) members, and also for the order, established for 
distributing the property, left after the liquidation of the association (the union). 
Article 123. The Rights and Duties of the Members of the Associations and the 
Unions 
1. The members of the association (the union) shall have the right to gratuitously enjoy its services. 
2. The member of the association (the union) shall have the right, at his own discretion, to withdraw 
from the association (the union) upon the expiry of the fiscal year. In this case he shall bear the subsidiary 
liability by the obligations of the association (the union) proportionately to his contribution in the course 
of two years from the moment of his withdrawal. 
The member of the association (the union) may be expelled from it by the decision of the remaining 
participants, in the cases and in accordance with the procedure, laid down by the constituent documents of 
the association (the union). Toward the liability of the expelled member of the association (the union) 
shall be applied the same rules as in the case of the member's withdrawal from the association (the union). 
3. Upon the consent of the members of the association (the union), a new participant may join it. 
The joining to the association (the union) of a new member may be grounded on his subsidiary liability 
by the obligations of the association (the union), which has arisen before his joining it. 
Chapter 5. Participation of the Russian Federation, of the Subjects of the Russian Federation and 
of the Municipal Entities 
in the Relationships, Regulated by the Civil Legislation 
Article 124. The Russian Federation, the Subjects of the Russian Federation and 
the Municipal Entities as the Subjects of Civil Law 
1. The Russian Federation, the subjects of the Russian Federation: the Republics, the territories, the 
regions, the cities of federal importance, the autonomous region, the autonomous areas, and also the urban 
and rural settlements and the other municipal entities shall come out in the relationships, regulated by the 
civil legislation, on equal terms with the other participants of these relationships - the citizens and the 
legal entities. 
2. Toward the subjects of civil law, indicated in Item 1 of the present Article, shall be applied the 
norms, defining the participation of the legal entities in the relationships, regulated by the civil legislation, 
unless otherwise following from the law or from the specifics of the given subjects. 
Article 125. The Order of Participation of the Russian Federation, of the 
Subjects of the Russian Federation and of the Municipal Entities in the Relationships, 
Regulated by the Civil Legislation 
1. The right to acquire and exercise by their actions the property and the personal rights, and to 
come out in the court on behalf of the Russian Federation and of the subjects of the Russian Federation 
shall be vested in the state power bodies within the scope of their jurisdiction, established by the acts, 
defining the status of these bodies. 
2. The right to acquire and exercise by their actions the rights and duties, indicated in Item 1 of the 
present Article, on behalf of the municipal entities shall be vested in the local self-government bodies 
within the scope of their jurisdiction, established by the acts, defining the status of these bodies. 
3. In the cases and in conformity with the procedure, stipulated by the federal laws, by the decrees 
of the President of the Russian Federation and the decisions of the Government of the Russian Federation, 
by the normative acts of the subjects of the Russian Federation and of the municipal entities, the state 
bodies, the local self-government bodies, and also the legal entities and the citizens may come out on their 
behalf upon their special order. 
Article 126. Liability by the Obligations of the Russian Federation, of the 
Subject of the Russian Federation and of the Municipal Entity 
1. The Russian Federation, the subject of the Russian Federation and the municipal entity shall be 
answerable by their obligations with the property they possess by the right of ownership, with the 
exception of the property that has been assigned to the legal entities, which they have set up by the right 
of economic or of operative management, and also of the property that shall be placed only in the state or 
in the municipal ownership. 
The turning of the penalty onto the land and the other natural resources in the state or in the 
municipal ownership shall be admitted in the law-stipulated cases. 
2. The legal entities, set up by the Russian Federation, by the subjects of the Russian Federation and 
by the municipal entities, shall not be answerable by their obligations. 
3. The Russian Federation, the subjects of the Russian Federation and the municipal entities shall 
not be answerable by the obligations of the legal entities they have set up, with the exception of the law
stipulated cases. 
4. The Russian Federation shall not be answerable by the obligations of the subjects of the Russian 
Federation and of the municipal entities. 
5. The subjects of the Russian Federation and the municipal entities shall not be answerable by one 
another's obligations and also by those of the Russian Federation. 
6. The rules, formulated in Items 2-5 of the present Article, shall not apply to the cases, when the 
Russian Federation has assumed upon itself the guarantee (surety) by the obligations of the subject of the 
Russian Federation, of the municipal or the legal entity, or when the said subjects have assumed upon 
themselves the guarantee (surety) by the obligations of the Russian Federation. 
Article 127. The Specifics of the Liability of the Russian Federation and of the 
Subjects of the Russian Federation in the Relationships, Regulated by the Civil 
Legislation, in Which the Foreign Legal Entities, Citizens and States Are Involved 
The specifics of the liability to be borne by the Russian Federation and by the subjects of the 
Russian Federation in the relationships, regulated by the civil legislation, in which the foreign legal 
entities, citizens and states are involved, shall be defined by the Law on the Immunity of the State and of 
Its Property. 
Subsection 3. The Objects of Civil Rights 
Chapter 6. The General Provisions 
Article 128. The Kinds of the Objects of Civil Rights 
To the objects of civil rights shall be referred the things, among them money and securities, and also 
the other kinds of the property, such as the rights of property; the works and services; information; the 
results of intellectual activities, including the exclusive right to these (the intellectual property); the non
material values. 
Article 129. The Circulation Capacity of the Objects of Civil Rights 
1. The objects of civil rights may be freely alienated or may pass from one person to another by way 
of the universal legal succession (by inheritance or as a result of the reorganization of the legal entity), or 
in another way, if they have not been withdrawn from circulation or restricted in the circulation. 
2. The kinds of the objects of civil rights, whose circulation shall not be admitted (the objects, 
withdrawn from circulation), shall be directly pointed out in the law. 
The kinds of the objects of civil rights, which may only be possessed by definite participants in the 
circulation, or whose being in the circulation shall be admitted by a special permit (the objects with a 
restricted circulation capacity), shall be defined in accordance with the law-established procedure. 
3. The land and the other natural resources shall be alienated or shall pass from one person to 
another in other ways so far as their circulation is admissible in conformity with the laws on the land and 
on the other natural resources. 
On restrictions on the negotiability of plots of land, see Land Code of the Russian Federation No. 136
FZ of October 25, 2001  
Article 130. The Movables and the Immovables 
Federal Law No. 213-FZ of December 30, 2004 amended Item 1 of Article 130 of this Code. The 
amendments shall come into force as of January 1, 2005 
See the previous text of the Item 
1. To the immovables (the immovable property, realty) shall be referred the land plots, the land plots 
with mineral deposits, the set-apart water objects and everything else, which is closely connected with the 
land, i.e., such objects as cannot be shifted without causing an enormous damage to their purpose, 
including the forests, the perennial green plantations, the buildings and all kind of structures, objects of 
incompleted construction. 
To the immovables shall also be referred the air-borne and sea-going vessels, the inland navigation 
ships and the space objects. The law may also refer to the immovables certain other property. 
2. The things, which have not been referred to the immovables, including money and securities, 
shall be regarded as the movables. The registration of the rights to the movables shall not be required, 
with the exception of the cases, pointed out in the law. 
Article 131. The State Registration of the Realty 
Federal Law No. 58-FZ of June 29 amended Item 1 of Article 131 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
1. The right of ownership and the other rights of estate to the immovables, the restriction of these 
rights, their arising, transfer and cessation shall be liable to the state registration in the Unified State 
Register, effected by the bodies carrying out the state registration of rights to real estate and transactions 
in it. Subject to the registration shall be: the right of ownership, the right of economic management, the 
right of operative management, the right of the inherited life possession, the right of the permanent use, 
the mortgage, the servitudes, and also the other rights in the cases, stipulated by the present Code and by 
the other laws. 
2. In the law-stipulated cases, alongside the state registration, may be effected the special 
registration or the registration of the individual kinds of the realty. 
3. The body, effecting the state registration of the rights to the realty and the deals with it, shall be 
obliged, upon the request of the owner of the rights, to certify the effected registration by issuing a 
document on the registered right or deals, or by making a superscription on the document, presented for 
registration. 
See the Model Regulations on the Institution of Justice for the State Registration of the Rights to Real 
Property and Deals with It approved by Decision of the Government of the Russian Federation No. 288 
of March 6, 1998  
4. The body, effecting the state registration of the rights to the realty and to the deals with it, shall be 
obliged to provide information on the effected registration and on the registered rights to any person. 
The information shall be issued in any one body, engaged in the registration of the realty, regardless 
of the place of effecting the registration. 
5. The refusal of the state registration of the right to the realty or of the deal with it, or the evasion 
by the corresponding body from registering these, may be appealed against in the court. 
6. The order of the state registration and the grounds for the refusal thereof shall be established in 
conformity with the present Code by the Law on the Registration of the Rights to the Realty and the Deals 
with It. 
See Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997 on the State Registration of 
Rights to Real Estate and of Transactions with It shall be enforced on the entire territory of the Russian 
Federation six months after its official publication 
See Instructions on the Procedure for the State Registration of Rights to the Immovable Property and 
of Deals with It in Condominiums approved by Order of the Ministry of Justice of the Russian 
Federation No. 152 of June 27, 2003  
See the Methodological Recommendations for the Procedure for Carrying Out the State Registration 
of Rights to the Realty and of Deals with It approved by Order of the Ministry of Justice of the Russian 
Federation No. 184 of July 1, 2002  
On the Procedure of State Registration of the Contracts of Purchase and Sale and Transfer of 
Property Rights for Living Space, see Instructions endorsed by Order of the Ministry of Justice of the 
Russian Federation No. 233 of August 6, 2001  
See Review of the Practice of settling disputes connected with the enforcement of the Federal Law on 
the state registration of rights to real estate and of transactions with it, given by Informational letter of 
the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 59 of February 16, 2001  
Article 132. The Enterprise 
1. The enterprise as an object of rights shall be recognized as a property complex, used for the 
performance of business activities. 
The enterprise in its entirety as a property complex shall be recognized as the realty. 
On State registration of rights to an enterprise as a property complex and of transactions with it see 
Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997  
2. The enterprise as a whole or a part thereof may be an object of the purchase and sale, of the 
mortgage, the lease and of the other deals, connected with the establishment, the change and the cessation 
of the rights of estate. 
Within the enterprise as a property complex shall be included all kinds of the property, intended for 
the performance of its activities, including the land plots, the buildings, the structures, the equipment, the 
implements, the raw materials, the products, the rights, the claims and the debts, and also the rights to the 
symbols, individualizing the given enterprise, its products, works and services (such as the trade name, 
the trade and the service marks), as well as the other exclusive rights, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
law or by the agreement. 
Article 133. The Indivisible Things 
The thing, whose division in kind is impossible without changing its purpose, shall be interpreted as 
indivisible. 
The specifics of apportioning a share in the right of ownership to the indivisible thing shall be 
defined by the rules, laid down in Articles 252 and 258 of the present Code. 
Article 134. The Composite Things 
In case a single whole is formed of heterogeneous things, presupposing their use for a single 
purpose, they shall be regarded as a single thing (a composite thing). 
The effect of the deal, made with respect to a composite thing, shall concern all its component parts, 
unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement. 
Article 135. The Principal Thing and Its Accessory 
The thing, intended for the servicing of another thing - the principal one - and connected with it by 
the common purpose (an accessory), shall share the fate of the principal thing, unless otherwise stipulated 
by the agreement. 
Article 136. The Fruits, Products and Incomes 
The receipts, resulting from the use of the property (the fruits, products and incomes), shall belong 
to the person, who has been using this property on the legal grounds, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
law, by the other legal acts or by the agreement on the use of the said property. 
Article 137. The Animals 
Toward the animals shall be applied the general rules on the property, unless otherwise stipulated by 
the law or by the other legal acts. 
While exercising the rights, a cruel treatment of the animals, contradicting the principles of 
humanity, shall not be admitted. 
Article 138. The Intellectual Property 
In the cases and in conformity with the procedure, established by the present Code and by the other 
laws, an exclusive right (the intellectual ownership) of the citizen or of the legal entity shall be recognized 
to the results of the intellectual activity and the means of the individualization of the legal entity, of the 
manufactured products, of the performed works and of the rendered services (the trade name, the trade 
and the service mark, etc.), equalized with them. 
The use of the results of the intellectual activity and of the means of individualization, which are the 
object of the exclusive rights, may be effected by the third persons only upon the consent of the owner of 
the rights. 
Article 139. The Official and the Commercial Secret 
1. The information shall be regarded as an official or a commercial secret, if it presents an actual or 
a potential commercial value because of its being unknown to the third persons, if there is no free access 
to it on legal grounds and if its owner is taking measures to protect its confidentiality. The data, which 
shall not be regarded as an official or a commercial secret, shall be defined by the law and by the other 
legal acts. 
See Federal Law No. 98-FZ of July 29, 2004 on Commercial Secrecy  
2. The information, which is an official or a commercial secret, shall be protected in the ways, 
stipulated by the present Code and by the other laws. 
The persons, who have obtained by illegal methods the information, which is an official or a 
commercial secret, shall be obliged to recompense the inflicted losses. The same obligation shall be 
imposed upon the workers, who have divulged an official or a commercial secret despite the labour 
agreement, including the contract, and upon the counteragents, who have done so despite the civil law 
agreement. 
On responsibility of employee who acquired access to information constituting a commercial secret, 
see Federal Law No. 98-FZ of July 29, 2004  
On the application by arbitration courts of Article 140 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation see 
Informational Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 70 
of November 4, 2002  
Article 140. The Money (Hard Currency) 
1. The rouble shall be the legal means of payment, which shall be accepted by its face value on the 
entire territory of the Russian Federation. 
The payments on the territory of the Russian Federation shall be effected both in cash and cashless. 
2. The cases of, the procedure and the terms for the use of foreign currency on the territory of the 
Russian Federation shall be defined by the law or in conformity with the established order. 
Article 141. The Currency Valuables 
The kinds of property, recognized as the currency valuables, and the order established for the deals 
made with them, shall be defined by the Law on the Currency Regulation and the Currency Control. 
The right of ownership to the currency valuables shall be protected in the Russian Federation on the 
general grounds. 
Chapter 7. The Securities 
See Federal Law No. 39-FZ of April 22, 1996 on the Securities Market, Federal Law No. 136-FZ of 
July 29, 1998 on the Peculiarities of the Issuance and Trading of State and Municipal Securities 
Article 142. The Security 
1. The security shall be a document, confirming, with the observance of the established form and 
obligatory requisites, the property rights, whose exercising or transfer shall be possible only upon its 
presentation. 
With the transfer of the security, all the rights, certified by it, shall also be transferred in their 
aggregate. 
2. In the cases, stipulated by the law, or in conformity with the order, established by the law for the 
exercising and the transfer of the rights, confirmed by the security, it shall be sufficient to present proofs 
of their being confirmed in the special register (a common-type or a computerized one). 
Article 143. The Kinds of Securities 
To the securities shall be referred: the government bond, the bond, the promissory note, the cheque, 
the deposit and the savings certificates, the savings-bank book to bearer, the bill of lading, the share, the 
privatization securities and also the other documents, which have been referred to the securities by the 
laws on the securities or in conformity with the order, established by these laws. 
Concerning types of securities see Federal Law No. 39-FZ of April 22, 1996 on the Securities Market 
On Mortgage Securities, see Federal Law No. 152-FZ of November 11, 2003 
Article 144. The Demands of the Security 
1. The kinds of the rights, certified by the securities, the obligatory requisites of the securities, the 
demands made on the form of the securities and the other indispensable requirements shall be defined by 
the law or in conformity with the law-established order. 
2. The absence of the indispensable requisites of the security or the non-correspondence of the 
security to the form, established for it, shall entail its insignificance. 
See Federal Law No. 39-FZ of April 22, 1996 on the Securities Market 
Article 145. The Subjects of the Rights, Certified by the Security 
1. The rights, certified by the security, may belong to: 
1) the bearer of the security (the security to bearer); 
2) the person, named in the security (the registered security); 
3) the person, named in the security, who shall exercise these rights himself or shall appoint by his 
instruction (order) another authorized person (the order security); 
2. The law may preclude the possibility of issuing a certain kind of securities as the registered ones, 
or the order ones, or those to bearer. 
See also Federal Law No. 39-FZ of April 22, 1996 on the Securities 
Market 
Article 146. Transfer of the Rights by the Security 
1. To effect the transfer to another person of the rights, certified by the security to bearer, it shall be 
sufficient to hand over the given security to the said person. 
2. The rights, certified by the registered security, shall be transferred in accordance with the order, 
established for ceding the demands (the cession). In conformity with Article 390 of the present Code, the 
person, transferring the right by the security, shall bear responsibility for the invalidity of the 
corresponding demand, but not for its non-execution. 
3. The rights by the order security shall be transferred by making a transfer superscription 
(endorsement) on the security in question. The endorser shall bear responsibility not only for the 
existence of the right, but also for its exercising. 
The endorsement, effected on the security, shall transfer all the rights, certified by the security, to 
the person, to whom, or to whose jurisdiction, the rights by the security are being transferred - i.e., to the 
endorsee. The endorsement shall be either a blank one (without the indication of the person, to whom or 
to whose jurisdiction the execution shall be due), or an order one (indicating the person, to whom or to 
whose jurisdiction the execution shall be due). 
The endorsement may amount only to the order to exercise the rights, certified by the security, 
without transferring these rights to the endorsee (the turnover endorsement). In this case, the endorsee 
shall come out in the capacity of the representative. 
Concerning the transfer of rights to securities and the realization of rights fixed by securities see also 
Federal Law No. 39-FZ of April 22, 1996 on the Securities Market 
Article 147. Execution by the Security 
1. The person, who has issued the security, and all those persons, who have endorsed it, shall bear 
the joint liability to its legal owner. In case of the satisfaction of the demand of the legal owner of the 
security concerning the execution of the obligation, certified by it, by one or by several persons from 
among those who have assumed the obligation by the security to him, they shall acquire the right of the 
reverse demand (the right of regress) to the rest of the persons, who have assumed the obligation by the 
security. 
2. The refusal to execute the obligation, certified by the security, with a reference to the absence of 
the ground for the obligation or for its invalidity, shall not be admitted. 
The owner of the security, who has discovered that the security has been forged or falsified, shall 
have the right to claim that the person, who has handed over this paper to him, properly execute the 
obligation, certified by the security, and recompense the losses. 
Concerning the realization of rights fixed by securities see also Federal Law No. 39-FZ of April 22, 
1996 on the Securities Market 
Article 148. Restoration of the Security 
The restoration of the rights by the lost securities to bearer and by the order securities shall be 
effected by the court in conformity with the procedure, stipulated by the procedural legislation. 
Article 149. The Non-Documentary Securities 
1. In the law-stipulated cases or in conformity with the law-established procedure, the person, who 
has been granted a special license, shall be able to effect the fixation of the rights, confirmed by the 
registered or by the order security, including in the non-documentary form (using the computer 
technology, etc.). To this form of the fixation of the rights shall be applied the rules, laid down for the 
securities, unless otherwise following from the specifics of the fixation. 
The person, who has effected the fixation of the right in the non-documentary form, shall be 
obliged, upon the demand of the owner of the right, to issue to him the document, testifying to the fact 
that the right has been fixed. 
The rights, certified by way of the above-said fixation, the procedure for the official fixation of the 
rights and the owners of the rights, for the documentary confirmation of the entries and for performing 
operations with the non- documentary securities shall be defined by the law or in conformity with the 
procedure, established by it. 
Concerning requirements to non-documentary securities see Federal Law No. 39-FZ of April 22, 1996 
on the Securities Market 
2. Operations with the non-documentary securities may be performed only drawing on the services 
of the person, who has been officially authorized to make the entries on the rights. The transfer, granting 
and restriction of the rights shall all be officially fixed by this person, who shall bear responsibility for the 
safety of the official entries, for guaranteeing their confidentiality, for the issue of true information on 
such entries, and for making official entries on the performed operations. 
See also Review of the Practice of Consideration by the Arbitration Courts of Disputes, Involved in 
the Application of the Norms for a Contract on Pledge and for the Other Provisional Deals with the 
Securities Informational given by Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the 
Russian Federation No. 67 of January 21, 2002  
See Regulations of the Undocumented Ordinary Bills Currency with Account Taken of their Holders' 
Rights, Regulations for the State Certification of the Operators of the Undocumentary Ordinary Bill 
Currency System approved by the Decision of the Federal Commission for Securities and the Share 
Market No. 5 of March 21, 1996 
Chapter 8. The Non-Material Values and Their Protection 
Article 150. The Non-Material Values 
1. The life and health, the personal dignity and personal immunity, the honour and good name, the 
business reputation, the immunity of private life, the personal and family secret, the right of a free 
movement, of the choice of the place of stay and residence, the right to the name, the copyright and the 
other personal non-property rights and non-material values, possessed by the citizen since his birth or by 
force of the law, shall be inalienable and untransferable in any other way. In the cases and in conformity 
with the procedure, stipulated by the law, the personal non-property rights and the other non-material 
values, possessed by the deceased person, may be exercised and protected by other persons, including the 
heirs of their legal owner. 
2. The non-material values shall be protected in conformity with the present Code and with the other 
laws in the cases and in the order, stipulated by these, and also in those cases and within that scope, in 
which the use of the ways of protecting the civil rights (Article 12) follow from the substance of the 
violated non-material right and from the nature of the consequences of this violation. 
Article 151. Compensation of the Moral Damage 
If the citizen has been inflicted a moral damage (the physical or moral sufferings) by the actions, 
violating his personal non-property rights or infringing upon the other non- material values in his 
possession, and also in the other law-stipulated cases, the court may impose upon the culprit the duty to 
pay out the monetary compensation for the said damage. 
When determining the size of compensation for the moral damage, the court shall take into 
consideration the extent of the culprit's guilt and the other circumstances, worthy of attention. The court 
shall also take into account the depth of the physical and moral sufferings, connected with the individual 
features of the person, to whom the damage has been done. 
Article 152. Protection of the Honour, Dignity and Business Reputation 
Concerning the issues which arose in connection with the protection of the honour, dignity and 
business reputation see Ruling of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation of September 27, 
1995, Judicial Overview of Settlement by Arbitration Courts of Disputes Associated with Protection of 
Business Reputation (Appendix to Information Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court 
of the Russian Federation No. 46 of September 23, 1999), Resolution of the Plenary Session of the 
Supreme Court of the Russian Federation No. 3 of February 24, 2005 
1. The citizen shall have the right to claim through the court that the information, discrediting his 
honour, dignity or business reputation be refuted, unless the person who has spread such information 
proves its correspondence to reality. 
By the demand of the interested persons, the citizen's honour and dignity shall also be liable to 
protection after his death. 
2. If the information, discrediting the honour, dignity or business reputation of the citizen, has been 
spread by the mass media, it shall be refuted by the same mass media. 
If the said information is contained in the document, issued by an organization, the given document 
shall be liable to an exchange or recall. 
In the other cases, the procedure for the refutation shall be ruled by the court. 
3. The citizen, with respect to whom the mass media have published the information, infringing 
upon his rights or his law-protected interests, shall have the right to publish his answer in the same mass 
media. 
4. If the ruling of the court has not been executed, the court shall have the right to impose upon the 
culprit a fine, to be exacted in the amount and in the order, stipulated by the procedural legislation, into 
the revenue of the Russian Federation. The payment of the fine shall not exempt the culprit from the duty 
to perform the action, ruled by the court decision. 
5. The citizen, with respect to whom the information, discrediting his honour, dignity or business 
reputation has been spread, shall have the right, in addition to the refutation of the given information, also 
to claim the compensation of the losses and of the moral damage, caused by its spread. 
6. If the person, who has spread the information, discrediting the honour, dignity or business 
reputation of the citizen, cannot be identified, the citizen shall have the right to turn to the court with the 
demand that it recognize the spread information as not corresponding to reality. 
7. The rules of the present Article on the protection of the business reputation of the citizen shall be 
applied, correspondingly, to the protection of the business reputation of the legal entity. 
Subsection 4. The Deals and the Representation 
Chapter 9. The Deals 
_ 1. The Concept, the Kinds and the Form of the Deals 
Article 153. The Concept of the Deal 
The deals shall be interpreted as the actions, performed by the citizens and by the legal entities, 
which are aimed at the establishment, the amendment or the cessation of the civil rights and duties. 
Article 154. The Agreements and the Unilateral Deals 
1. The deals may be bilateral or multilateral (agreements), and also unilateral. 
2. The deal shall be regarded as unilateral, if for its performance in conformity with the law, with 
the other legal acts or with the agreement between the parties, the expression of the will of only one party 
to it is necessary and sufficient. 
3. To conclude an agreement, the expression of the agreed will of the two parties (bilateral deals), or 
of the three or more parties (multilateral deals) shall be required. 
Article 155. The Duties by the Unilateral Deal 
The unilateral deal shall create duties for the person, who has effected it. It shall create duties for 
other persons only in the cases, established by the law or by an agreement with these persons. 
Article 156. Legal Regulation of the Unilateral Deals 
Toward the unilateral deals shall be correspondingly applied the general provisions on the 
obligations and on the agreements, so far as this does not contradict the law, the unilateral character and 
the substance of the deal. 
Article 157. The Deals, Made Under a Condition 
1. The deal shall be regarded as made under the suspensive condition, if the parties have made the 
arising of the rights and duties dependent on the circumstance, about which it is unknown, whether it will, 
or will not, take place. 
2. The deal shall be regarded as made under the subsequent condition, if the parties have made the 
cessation of the rights and duties dependent upon the circumstance, about which it is unknown, whether it 
will, or will not, take place. 
3. If the arrival of the condition has been obstructed in bad faith by the party, for which its taking 
place is undesirable, the said condition shall be recognized as having taken place. 
If the arrival of the condition has been obstructed in bad faith by the party, for which its taking place 
is desirable, the said condition shall be recognized as not having taken place. 
Article 158. The Form of the Deals 
1. The deals shall be effected orally or in written form (simple or notarial). 
2. The deal, which may be made orally, shall be regarded as having been effected also in the case, 
when the behaviour of the person clearly testifies to his will to effect the deal. 
3. Silence shall be recognized as the expression of the will to effect the deal in the cases, stipulated 
by the law or by the agreement between the parties. 
Article 159. The Oral Deals 
1. The deal, for which no written (simple or notarial) form has been stipulated by the law or by the 
agreement between the parties, may be effected orally. 
2. Unless otherwise ruled by the agreement between the parties, all the deals, executed at the 
moment of their being made, may be effected orally, with the exception of those, for which the notarial 
form has been established, and also of those, the non-observance of the simple written form of which 
causes their invalidity. 
3. The deals, effected in the execution of the agreement, concluded in written form, may by the 
agreement of the parties be effected orally, unless this contradicts the law, the other legal acts and the 
agreement. 
Article 160. The Written Form of the Deal 
1. The deal in written form shall be effected by way of compiling a document, expressing its content 
and signed by the person or by the persons, who are effecting the deal, or by the persons, properly 
authorized by them to do so. 
The bilateral (multilateral) deals may be made in the ways, stipulated by Items 2 and 3 of Article 
434 of the present Code. 
The law, the other legal acts and the agreement between the parties may decree additional 
requirements, to which the form of the deal shall correspond (it shall be made on the form of a definite 
kind, shall be certified by the stamp, etc.), and also the consequences of not satisfying these requirements. 
If such consequences have not been stipulated, the consequences of not observing the simple written form 
of the deal shall be applied (Item 1 of Article 162). 
2. The use in effecting the deals of a facsimile reproduction of the signature, made with the 
assistance of the means of the mechanical or the other kind of copying, of the electronic-numerical 
signature or of another analogue of the sign manual shall be admitted in the cases and in the order, 
stipulated by the law and by the other legal acts, or by the agreement of the parties. 
See Federal Law No. 1-FZ of January 10, 2002 on Electronic Digital Signature  
3. If the citizen, as a result of a physical defect, illness or illiteracy cannot put down his signature 
himself, another citizen may sign the deal upon his request. The latter's signature shall be certified by the 
notary or by another official person, possessing the right to perform such kind of the notarial action, with 
the indication of the reasons, by force of which the person, effecting the deal, was unable to put under it 
his sign manual himself. 
However, in effecting the deals, indicated in Item 4, Article 185 of the present Code, and in issuing 
warrants for their effecting, the signature of the person, signing the deal, may also be certified by the 
organization, where the citizen, who is unable to put under it his sign manual himself, works, or by the 
administration of the in-patient medical institution, where he is undergoing medical treatment. 
Article 161. The Deals, Made in the Simple Written Form 
1. Shall be effected in the simple written form, with the exception of the deals, requiring notarial 
certification: 
1) the deals of the legal entities between themselves and with the citizens; 
2) the deals of the citizens between themselves to the sum at least ten times exceeding the minimum 
size of wages, fixed by the law, and in the law-stipulated cases - regardless of the sum of the deal. 
2. The observance of the simple written form shall not be required for the deals, which, in 
conformity with Article 159 of the present Code, may be effected orally. 
Article 162. The Consequences of the Non-observance of the Simple Written 
Form of the Deal 
1. The non-observance of the simple written form of the deal shall in the case of a dispute deprive 
the parties of the right to refer to the testimony for the confirmation of the deal and of its terms, while not 
depriving them of the right to cite the written and the other kind of proofs. 
2. In the cases, directly pointed out in the law or in the agreement between the parties, the non
observance of the simple written form of the deal shall entail its invalidity. 
3. The non-observance of the simple written form in a foreign economic deal shall entail its 
invalidity. 
Article 163. The Notarially Certified Deal 
1. The notarial certification of the deal shall be performed by making upon the document, 
corresponding to the requirements of Article 160 of the present Code, of the certifying superscription by 
the notary or by another official person, possessing the right to perform such kind of the notarial action. 
2. The notarial certification of the deals shall be obligatory: 
1) in the cases, pointed out by the law; 
2) in the cases, stipulated by the parties' agreement, even if this form is not required for the given 
kind of the deals by the law. 
Article 164. The State Registration of the Deals 
1. The deals with the land and with the other realty shall be subject to the state registration in the 
cases and in conformity with the order, stipulated by Article 131 of the present Code and by the Law on 
the Registration of the Rights to the Realty and the Deals with It. 
2. The law may decree the state registration of the deals with the realty of certain kinds. 
Article 165. The Consequences of the Non-Observance of the Notarial Form of 
the Deal and of the Requirement for Its Registration 
1. The non-observance of the notarial form of the deal and, in the law-stipulated cases, of the 
requirement for its state registration, shall entail its invalidity. Such kind of the deal shall be regarded as 
insignificant. 
2. If one of the parties has executed, in full or in part, the deal, requiring the notarial certification, 
while the other party has been evading such certification of the deal, the court shall have the right, upon 
the claim of the party, which has executed the deal, to recognize the deal as valid. In this case, no 
subsequent certification of the deal shall be required. 
3. If the deal, requiring the state registration, has been made in the proper form, but one of the 
parties is evading its registration, the court shall have the right, upon the claim of the other party, to adopt 
the decision on the registration of the deal. In this case the deal shall be registered in conformity with the 
court ruling. 
4. In the cases, stipulated by Items 2 and 3 of the present Article, the party, ungroundlessly evading 
the notarial certification or the state registration of the deal, shall be obliged to recompense to the other 
party the losses, inflicted by the delay in the effecting or in the registration of the deal. 
_ 2. The Invalidity of the Deals 
Article 166. The Disputable and the Insignificant Deals 
1. The deal shall be invalid on the grounds, established by the present Code, by force of its being 
recognized as such by the court (a disputable deal), or regardless of such recognition (an insignificant 
deal). 
2. The claim for recognizing the disputed deal to be invalid may be lodged by the persons, pointed 
out in the present Code. 
The claim for the application of the consequences of an insignificant deal may be submitted by any 
interested person. The court shall also have the right to apply such consequences on its own initiative. 
Article 167. The General Provisions on the Consequences of the Invalidity of 
the Deal 
1. The invalid deal shall not entail legal consequences, with the exception of those involved in its 
invalidity, and shall be invalid from the moment of its effecting. 
2. If the deal has been recognized as invalid, each of the parties shall be obliged to return to the 
other party all it has received from it by the deal, and in the case of such return to be impossible in kind 
(including when the deal has been involved in the use of the property, the work performed or the service 
rendered), its cost shall be recompensed in money - unless the other consequences of the invalidity of the 
deal have been stipulated by the law. 
3. If it follows from the content of the disputed deal that it may only be terminated for the future, the 
court, while recognizing the deal to be invalid, shall terminate its operation for the future. 
Article 168. Invalidity of the Deal Not Corresponding to the Law or to the Other 
Legal Acts 
The deal, which does not correspond to the requirements of the law or of the other legal acts, shall 
be regarded as insignificant, unless the law establishes that such a deal is disputable or stipulates the other 
consequences of the breach. 
Article 169. Invalidity of the Deal, Made for the Purpose, Contradicting the 
Foundations of the Law and Order, and of Morality 
The deal, which has been aimed at the goal, flagrantly contrary to the foundations of the law and 
order, or of morality, shall be regarded as insignificant. 
If the malicious intent has been found on the part of both parties to such a deal, in the case of the 
execution of the deal by both parties, all they have gained by the deal shall be exacted from them into the 
revenue of the Russian Federation, and in the case of the deal being executed by one party, into the 
revenue of the Russian Federation shall be exacted all the gain by the deal, derived by the other party, and 
also all that was due from it to the first party in compensation of the gain. 
If the malicious intent has been found in only one party to such a deal, all it has gained by the deal 
shall be returned to the other party, while what the latter has received, or what is due to it in compensation 
of the executed, shall be exacted into the revenue of the Russian Federation. 
Article 170. Invalidity of the Sham and of the Feigned Deal 
1. The sham deal, i.e., the deal, effected only for the form's sake, without an intention to create the 
legal consequences, corresponding to it, shall be regarded as insignificant. 
2. The feigned deal, i.e., the deal, which has been effected for the purpose of screening another deal, 
shall be regarded as insignificant. Toward the deal, which has actually been intended, shall be applied the 
relevant rules, with account for its substance. 
Article 171. Invalidity of the Deal, Made by the Citizen, Recognized as Legally 
Incapable 
1. The deal, effected by the citizen, who has been recognized as legally incapable on account of a 
mental derangement, shall be regarded as insignificant. 
Each of the parties to such a deal shall be obliged to return to the other party all it has received in 
kind, and if it is impossible to return what has been received in kind - to recompense its cost in money. 
Besides that, the legally capable party shall also be obliged to recompense to the other party the 
actual damage the latter has sustained, if the legally capable party has been aware, or should have been 
aware, of the legal incapability of the other party. 
2. In the interest of the citizen, recognized as legally incapable on account of a mental derangement, 
the deal he has effected may be recognized by the court as valid upon the demand of his guardian, if it has 
been made to the benefit of the said citizen. 
Article 172. Invalidity of the Deal, Made by the Minor Below 14 Years of Age 
1. The deal, effected by the minor, who has not reached 14 years of age (the young minor), shall be 
regarded as invalid. Toward such a deal shall be applied the rules, stipulated by the second and the third 
paragraphs of Item 1 of Article 171 of the present Code. 
2. In the interest of the young minor, the deal he has effected may be recognized by the court as 
valid upon the demand of his parents, adopters or guardian, if it has been made to the benefit of the young 
minor. 
3. The rules of the present Article shall not concern the petty everyday and other kind of deals, 
effected by the young minors, which they have the right to make independently in conformity with Article 
28 of the present Code. 
Article 173. Invalidity of the Deal, Made by the Legal Entity, Which Is Beyond 
the Scope of Its Legal Capacity 
The deal, effected by the legal entity in contradiction to the goals of the activity, definitely restricted 
in its constituent documents, or by the legal entity, which has no license for the performance of the 
corresponding activity, may be recognized by the court as invalid upon the claim of this legal entity, of its 
founder (participant), or of the state body, exerting control over the activity of the legal entity, if it has 
been proved that the other party to the deal has been aware, or should have been aware, of its being 
illegal. 
Deal 
Article 174. The Consequences of the Restriction of Powers for Making the 
If the powers of the person for effecting the deal have been restricted by the agreement, or the 
powers of the legal entity's body have been restricted by its constituent documents, as compared to the 
way they have been delineated in the warrant or in the law, or to the extent to which they may be regarded 
as evident from the actual setting, in which the deal is being effected, and if, while effecting the deal, such 
person or such body have trespassed the borders of such restrictions, the deal may be recognized by the 
court as invalid upon the claim of the person, in whose interest the said restrictions have been imposed, 
only in the cases, when it has been proved that the other party to the deal has been aware, or should have 
been aware, of the said restrictions. 
On Some Issues Regarding the Application of Article 174 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation 
During the Realization by Organs of Juridical Entities of Their Authority to Conclude a Transaction 
see Decision of the Plenum of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 9 of May 14, 
1998 
Article 175. Invalidity of the Deal, Made by the Minor of 14-18 Years of Age 
1. The deal, effected by the minor, aged from 14 to 18 years, without the consent of his parents, 
adopters or his trustee, in the cases when such consent is required in conformity with Article 26 of the 
present Code, may be recognized by the court as invalid upon the claim of the parents, adopters or the 
trustee. 
If such a deal has been recognized as invalid, the rules, stipulated by the second and the third 
paragraphs of Item 1 of Article 171 of the present Code, shall be correspondingly applied. 
2. The rules of the present Article shall not concern the deals of the minors, who have acquired the 
full legal capacity. 
Article 176. Invalidity of the Deal, Made by the Citizen Whose Legal Capacity 
Has Been Restricted by the Court 
1. The deal, involved in the disposal of the property, which has been effected without the consent of 
his trustee by the citizen, whose legal capacity has been restricted by the court on account of his abuse of 
alcohol or drug addiction, may be recognized by the court as invalid upon the claim of the trustee. 
If such a deal has been recognized as invalid, the rules, stipulated by the second and the third 
paragraphs of Item 1 of Article 171 of the present Code, shall be correspondingly applied. 
2. The rules of the present Article shall not concern the petty everyday deals, which the citizen, 
restricted in his legal capacity, has the right to effect independently in conformity with Article 30 of the 
present Code. 
Article 177. Invalidity of the Deal, Made by the Citizen, Incapable of Realizing 
the Meaning of His Actions or of Keeping Them Under Control 
1. The deal, effected by the citizen, who, while being legally capable, at the moment of making the 
deal was in such a state that he was incapable of realizing the meaning of his actions or of keeping them 
under control, may be recognized by the court as invalid upon the claim of this citizen or of the other 
persons, whose rights or law-protected interests have been violated as a result of its being effected. 
2. The deal, effected by the citizen, who has been recognized as legally incapable at a later date, 
may be recognized by the court as invalid upon the claim of his guardian, if it has been proved that at the 
moment of making the deal, the citizen was incapable of realizing the meaning of his actions or of 
keeping them under control. 
3. If the deal has been recognized as invalid on the ground of the present Article, the rules, 
stipulated by the second and the third paragraphs of Item 1 of Article 171 of the present Code, shall be 
correspondingly applied. 
Article 178. Invalidity of the Deal, Made Under the Impact of Delusion 
1. The deal, effected under the impact of the delusion, which has been of an essential importance, 
may be recognized by the court as invalid upon the claim of the party, which has acted under the impact 
of the delusion. 
Of an essential importance shall be the delusion about the nature of the deal, or about the identity of 
the features of its object, which essentially narrow down the possibility of its use for the intended 
purpose. The delusion about the motives of the deal shall not be regarded as essential. 
2. If the deal has been recognized as invalid as that effected under the impact of the delusion, the 
rules, stipulated by Item 2, Article 167 of the present Code, shall be correspondingly applied. 
In addition to that, the party, upon whose claim the deal has been recognized as invalid, shall have 
the right to claim from the other party the compensation of the actual damage inflicted upon it, if it proves 
that the delusion has arisen through the fault of the other party. If this has not been proven, the party, 
upon whose claim the deal has been recognized as invalid, shall be obliged to recompense to the other 
party upon its claim the actual damage inflicted upon it, even if the delusion has arisen on account of the 
circumstances, not depending on the deluded party. 
Article 179. Invalidity of the Deal, Made Under the Impact of the Fraud, 
Coercion, a Threat or an Ill-Intentioned Agreement of the Representative of One Party 
with the Other Party, or of the Coincidence of Ill Circumstances 
1. The deal, effected under the impact of the fraud, coercion, a threat or an ill-intentioned agreement 
of the representative of one party with the other party, and also the deal, which the person has been forced 
to make on the extremely unfavourable terms because of the coincidence of ill circumstances, while this 
has been made use of by the other party (the bondage deal), may be recognized as invalid by the court 
upon the claim of the victim. 
2. If the deal has been recognized as invalid on one of the grounds, pointed out in Item 1 of the 
present Article, all that the other party has received by the deal shall be returned by it to the victim, and in 
case it is impossible to return all this in kind, its cost shall be recompensed in money. The property, which 
the victim has received by the deal from the other party, shall be passed into the revenue of the Russian 
Federation. In case of the impossibility to pass the property into the revenue of the state in kind, its cost 
shall be exacted in money. In addition, the victim shall be recompensed by the other party all the actual 
damage inflicted upon him. 
Article 180. The Consequences of the Invalidity of a Part of the Deal 
The invalidity of a part of the deal shall not entail the invalidity of its other parts, if it may be 
supposed that the deal could have been effected without the incorporation into it of the invalidated part. 
Federal Law No. 109-FZ of July 21, 2005 reworded Article 181 of this Code 
See the previous text of the Article 
For a claim for application of the consequences of the invalidity of a transaction deemed null and void 
the period of limitations established by Article 181 of this Code is also applicable to the claims for 
which the term of filing set by this Code earlier has not expired before the entry into force of Federal 
Law No. 109-FZ of July 21, 2005  
Article 181. Statute of Limitations for Invalid Transactions 
1. The time limit of the statute of limitations for a claim for applying the consequences of the 
invalidity of a transaction deemed null and void is three years. The period of limitations for such a claim 
is counted from the day on which the performance of the transaction commenced. 
2. The time limit of the statute of limitations for a claim for declaring a voidable transaction invalid 
and for the application of consequences of the invalidity thereof is one year. The period of limitations for 
such a claim is counted from the day of termination of the violence or duress under the influence of which 
the transaction has been concluded (Item 1 of Article 179) or from the day when the plaintiff learned or 
should have learned about other circumstances deemed a ground for declaring the transaction invalid. 
Chapter 10. The Representation. The Warrant 
Article 182. The Representation 
1. The deal, effected by one person (the representative) on behalf of another person (the representee) 
by force of the power, based on the warrant, on the indication of the law or on the act, issued by the state 
body or by the local self-government body, authorized for this purpose, shall directly create, amend or 
terminate the civil rights and duties of the representee. 
The power may also stem from the setting, in which the representative operates (the salesman in 
retail trade, the cashier, etc.). 
2. The persons, who operate in the interest of the other persons, but on their own behalf (the trade 
agents, the trustees of a bankrupt's estate, the executors of the will, etc.), and also the persons, authorized 
to enter into negotiations on the deals, which may be possibly effected in the future, shall not act as 
representatives. 
3. The representative shall not effect the deals on behalf of the representee in his own interest. 
Neither shall he effect such deals in the interest of another person, whose representative he is at the same 
time, with the exception of the cases of the commercial representation. 
4. The effecting through the representative of the deal, which by its nature shall be effected only in 
person, and also of the other deals, which have been pointed out in the law, shall not be admitted. 
Article 183. The Effecting of the Deal by an Unauthorized Person 
1. If the deal has been effected on behalf of the other person in the absence of relevant powers, or in 
case such powers have been exceeded, the deal shall be regarded as made on behalf and in the interest of 
the person who has made it, unless the other person (the representee) subsequently directly approves of 
such a deal. 
2. The subsequent approval of the deal by the representee shall create, amend and terminate for him 
the civil rights and duties by the given deal from the moment of its being effected. 
On Some Issues of the Practoce of Application of Article 183 of this Code, see Information Letter of 
the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 57 of October 23, 2000  
Article 184. The Commercial Representation 
1. The trade agent shall be the person, who constantly and independently represents and acts on 
behalf of businessmen in their concluding agreements in the sphere of business activities. 
2. The simultaneous commercial representation of different parties in the deal shall be admitted 
upon the consent of these parties and in the other law-stipulated cases. The trade agent shall be obliged to 
execute the orders he has been given with the circumspection of a common businessman. 
The trade agent shall have the right to claim the payment of the agreed remuneration and the 
compensation of the expenses, he has incurred while executing the commission, from the parties to the 
agreement in equal shares, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement between them. 
3. The commercial representation shall be performed on the ground of a commission contract, 
concluded in written form and containing instructions on the agent's powers, and in the absence of such 
instructions - also the warrant. 
The trade agent shall be obliged to keep in secret the information on the commercial deals even after 
the execution of the commission given to him. 
4. The specific features of the commercial representation in the individual spheres of business 
activities shall be established by the law and by the other legal acts. 
Article 185. The Warrant 
1. The warrant shall be recognized as the written authorization document, granted by one person to 
the other person for the purpose of representing him before the third persons. The written authorization 
document for effecting the deal by the representative may be presented by the representee directly to the 
corresponding third person. 
2. The warrant for effecting the deals, requiring the notarial form, shall be notarially certified, with 
the exception of the law-stipulated cases. 
3. To the notarially certified warrants shall be equalized: 
1) the warrants of the servicemen and of the other persons, undergoing medical treatment in military 
hospitals and sanatoria, and in other military medical institutions, certified by the head of such an 
institution, by his deputy for medicine, by the senior doctor, or by the doctor on duty; 
2) the warrants of the servicemen, and in the places of the stationing of military units, formations, 
institutions and military educational establishments, where there are no notary's offices or other bodies, 
performing notarial actions, also the warrants of the workers and employees, of their family members and 
of the family members of the servicemen, certified by the commander (the head) of this unit, formation, 
institution or establishment; 
3) the warrants of the persons, maintained in the places of the deprivation of freedom (in the prisons 
and the prison camps), certified by the head of the corresponding place of the deprivation of freedom; 
4) the warrants of the adult legally capable citizens, staying at the institutions for the social 
maintenance of the population, certified by the administration of the given institution or by the head (the 
deputy head) of the corresponding body for the social maintenance of the population. 
4. The warrant for the receipt of the wages and the other payments, connected with labour relations, 
for the receipt of the author's and the inventor's fees, of the pensions, allowances and grants, of the 
citizens' deposits in the banks and of their correspondence, including money orders and parcels, may also 
be certified by the organization, in which the trustee works or studies, by the housing-maintenance 
organization at the place of his residence and by the administration of the in-patient medical institution, in 
which he is undergoing medical treatment. 
Federal Law No. 111-FZ of August 12, 1996 supplemented Item 4 of Article 185 of this Civil Code 
with the second paragraph  
A power of attorney for the drawing by a representative of a citizen of his deposit in a bank, or 
monetary funds from his bank account, or for the receipt of correspondence addressed thereto in 
organizations of communications, and also for the making on behalf of a citizen of any other transactions 
mentioned in Paragraph One of the present Item may be attested by the relevant bank or organization of 
communications. Such power of attorney shall be attested free of charge. 
5. The warrant, granted on behalf of the legal entity, shall bear the signature of its head or of the 
other person, authorized for this action by its constituent documents, and shall be certified by the stamp of 
this organization. 
The warrant, granted on behalf of the legal entity, which is based on the state or municipal property, 
for the receipt or for the issue of money and of other property values, shall also be signed by the chief 
(senior) accountant of this organization. 
Article 186. The Period of the Warrant 
1. The period of the warrant shall not exceed three years. If no term has been indicated in it, the 
warrant shall stay in force in the course of one year from the date of its granting. 
The warrant, in which no date of its granting has been indicated, shall be regarded as insignificant. 
2. The notarially certified warrant, intended for the performance of actions abroad and containing no 
indication of the term of its operation, shall stay in force until it is revoked by the person, who has granted 
it. 
Article 187. Transfer of the Warrant 
1. The person, to whom the warrant has been granted (the warrantee) shall be obliged to perform the 
actions, for which he has been authorized, in person. He shall be able to transfer their performance to 
another person, if he is authorized to do so by the warrant, or if he has been forced to do so on account of 
the circumstances in order to protect the interests of the person, who has granted him the warrant (the 
warrantor). 
2. The person, who has transferred the power of attorney to another person, shall be obliged to 
notify about it the warrantor, and to pass to him all the essential information on the person, to whom he 
has transferred the said power. The failure to discharge this duty shall impose upon the person, who has 
transferred the power of attorney by the warrant, the same responsibility for the actions of the person, to 
whom he has passed the power, as he would have borne for his own actions. 
3. The warrant, granted by way of transferring the power of attorney, shall be notarized, with the 
exception of the cases, stipulated in Item 4 of Article 185 of the present Code. 
4. The period of operation of the warrant, granted by way of transferring the power of attorney, shall 
not exceed the period of the warrant, on the ground of which it has been granted. 
Article 188. Withdrawal of the Warrant 
1. The operation of the warrant shall be terminated as a result of: 
1) the expiry of the period of the warrant; 
2) the revoking of the warrant by the person, who has granted it; 
3) refusal on the part of the person, to whom is has been granted; 
4) the termination of the legal entity, on whose behalf the warrant has been granted; 
5) the termination of the legal entity, in whose name the warrant has been granted; 
6) the death of the citizen, who has granted the warrant, or his recognition as legally incapable, 
partially capable or missing; 
7) the death of the citizen, to whom the warrant has been granted, or his recognition as legally 
incapable, partially capable or missing. 
2. The person, who has granted the warrant (the warrantor), shall have the right at any time to 
revoke the warrant or the transfer of the warrant, while the person, to whom the warrant has been granted 
(the warrantee), shall have the right at any time to reject it. An agreement on the renouncement of these 
rights shall be insignificant. 
3. The transfer of the warrant shall lose power with the termination of the warrant. 
Article 189. The Consequences of the Termination of the Warrant 
1. The person, who has granted the warrant and who has subsequently revoked it, shall be obliged to 
notify about it the person, to whom the warrant has been issued, and also the third persons he knows, for 
the representation before whom the warrant has been granted. The same responsibility shall be imposed 
upon the legal successors of the warrantor, in the cases of the termination of the warrant on the grounds, 
stipulated in Subitems 4 and 6 of Item 1 of Article 188 of the present Code. 
2. The rights and duties, which have arisen as a result of the actions of the person, to whom the 
warrant has been granted (the warrantee), before the moment when he has learned, or should have 
learned, about its termination, shall stay in force for the warrantor and his legal successors with respect to 
the third persons. This rule shall not be applied, if the third person has been aware, or should have been 
aware, of the fact that the operation of the warrant has been terminated. 
3. After the termination of the warrant, the warrantee or his legal successors shall be obliged to 
immediately return it. 
Subsection 5. The Term. The Limitation of Actions 
Chapter 11. The Counting of the Term 
Article 190. Definition of the Term 
The term, established by the law, by the other legal acts and by the deal, or that fixed by the court, 
shall be defined by the calendar date or by the expiry of the period of time, counted in years, months, 
weeks, days or hours. 
The term may also be defined by the reference to the event, which shall inevitably take place. 
Article 191. The Start of the Term, Defined by a Period of Time 
The proceeding of the term, defined by a period of time, shall start on the next day after the calendar 
date or after the occurrence of the event, by which its start has been defined. 
Article 192. The End of the Term, Defined by a Period of Time 
1. The term, counted in years, shall expire in the corresponding month and on the corresponding day 
of the last year of the term. 
Toward the term, defined as a half of the year, shall be applied the rules for the terms, counted in 
months. 
2. Toward the term, counted in the quarters of the year, shall be applied the rules for the terms, 
counted by months. The quarter of the year shall be equal to three months, and the quarters shall be 
counted from the beginning of the year. 
3. The term, counted in months, shall expire on the corresponding day of the last month of the term. 
The term, defined as a fortnight, shall be regarded as the term, counted in days, and shall be equal to 
15 days. 
If the term, counted in months, expires in the month, which has no corresponding date, it shall 
expire on the last day of this month. 
4. The term, counted in weeks, shall expire on the corresponding day of the last week of the term. 
Article 193. Expiry of the Term on a Holiday 
If the last day of the term falls on a holiday, the day of the expiry of the term shall be the working 
day, following right after it. 
Article 194. Procedure for Performing Actions on the Last Day of the Term 
1. If the term has been fixed for the performance of a certain action, it may be performed before the 
expiry of 24 hours of the last day of the term. 
However, if this action has to be performed in an organization, the term shall expire at the hour, 
when, in conformity with the established rules, the performance of the corresponding actions in this 
organization is terminated. 
2. Written applications and notifications, handed in to a communications agency before the expiry 
of 24 hours of the last day of the term, shall be regarded as executed on time. 
Chapter 12. The Limitation of Actions 
On some issues connected with the application of norms of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation 
on the limitation of action, see Decision of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation 
and Plenum of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 15/18 of November 12, 15, 
2001  
Article 195. The Concept of the Limitation of Actions 
The limitation of actions shall be recognized as the term, fixed for the protection of the right by the 
claim of the person, whose right has been violated. 
Article 196. The General Term of the Limitation of Actions 
The general term of the limitation of actions shall be laid down as three years. 
Article 197. Special Terms of the Limitation of Actions 
1. For the individual kinds of claims, the law may establish special terms of the limitation of actions, 
reduced or extended as compared to the general term. 
2. The rules of Articles 195 and 198-207 of the present Code shall also be extended to the special 
terms of the limitation of actions, unless otherwise established by the law. 
Article 198. Invalidity of the Agreement on Changing the Terms of the 
Limitation of Actions 
The terms of the limitation of actions and the order of their counting shall not be changed by an 
agreement between the parties. 
The grounds for the suspension and the interruption of the proceeding of the terms of the limitation 
of actions shall be laid down by the present Code and by the other laws. 
Article 199. Application of the Limitation of Actions 
1. The claim for the protection of the violated right shall be accepted by the court for consideration 
regardless of the expiry of the term of the limitation of actions. 
2. The limitation of actions shall be applied by the court only upon the application of the party to the 
dispute, filed before the court has passed the decision. 
The expiry of the term of the limitation of actions, the application of which has been pleaded by the 
party to the dispute, shall be the ground for the court passing the decision on the rejection of the claim. 
Article 200. The Start of the Proceeding of the Term of the Limitation of 
Actions 
1. The proceeding of the term of the limitation of actions shall start from the day, when the person 
has learned, or should have learned, about the violation of his right. Exceptions to this rule shall be 
established by the present Code and by the other laws. 
2. By the obligations with a fixed term of execution, the proceeding of the term of the limitation of 
actions shall start after the expiry of the term of execution. 
By the obligations without a fixed term of execution, or by those, whose term of execution has been 
defined as that on demand, the proceeding of the term of the limitation of actions shall start from the 
moment, when the creditor's right to present the claim for the execution of the obligation arises, and if the 
debtor has been granted a privileged term for the execution of such a claim, the term of the limitation of 
actions shall be counted after the expiry of the said term. 
3. By the regress obligations, the proceeding of the term of the limitation of actions shall start from 
the moment of execution of the basic obligation. 
Article 201. The Term of the Limitation of Actions in the Substitution of the 
Persons in the Obligation 
The substitution of the persons in the obligation shall not entail a change of the term of the 
limitation of actions or of the order of its counting. 
Article 202. Suspension of the Proceeding of the Term of the Limitation of 
Actions 
1. The proceeding of the term of the limitation of actions shall be suspended: 
1) if the filing of the claim has been obstructed by an extraordinary and under the given conditions 
inexorable circumstance (a force-majeure); 
2) if the plaintiff or the defendant is in the Armed Forces, put under the martial law; 
3) by force of the postponement of the execution of the obligations (a moratorium), decreed on the 
ground of the law by the Government of the Russian Federation; 
4) by force of the suspension of the operation of the law or of the other legal act, regulating the 
corresponding relationship. 
2. The proceeding of the term of the limitation of actions shall be suspended under the condition that 
the circumstances, pointed out in the present Article, have arisen or have been existing over the last six 
months of the term of the limitation, and if this term is equal to six months or is less than six months - 
over the period of the term of the limitation of actions. 
3. From the day of the termination of the circumstance, which has served as the ground for the 
suspension of the limitation, the proceeding of its term shall be resumed. The remaining part of the term 
shall be extended to six months, and in case the term of the limitation of actions is equal to six months or 
is less than six months - up to the term of the limitation. 
Article 203. Interruption of the Proceeding of the Term of Limitation of Actions 
The proceeding of the term of the limitation of actions shall be interrupted by the filing of a claim in 
conformity with the established order, and also by the obligator's performing the actions, which testify to 
his admitting the debt. 
After the interruption, the proceeding of the term of the limitation shall start anew; the time that has 
expired before the interruption, shall not be included into the new term. 
See Decision of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation and Plenum of the Higher 
Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 15/18 of November 12, 15, 2001 
Article 204. Proceeding of the Term of Limitation if the Claim Is Dismissed 
If the court dismisses the claim, the term of limitation, which has started before the claim was filed, 
shall continue to proceed in the general order. 
If the court dismisses the claim, filed in a criminal case, the term of limitation, which has started 
before the claim was filed, shall be suspended until the sentence on dismissing the claim comes into legal 
force; the time, over which the limitation has been suspended, shall not be included into the term of 
limitation. In case the remaining part of the term of the limitation of actions is less than six months, it 
shall be extended to six months. 
Article 205. Restoration of the Term of the Limitation of Actions 
In exceptional cases, when the court recognizes the cause of missing the term of limitation as valid 
on the ground of the circumstances (it being related to the plaintiff's personal characteristics, such as a 
grave illness, total disability, illiteracy, etc.), the citizen's violated right shall be liable to protection. The 
reasons for his missing the term of the limitation of actions may be recognized as valid, if they have taken 
place within the last six months of the term of limitation, and if this term is equal to six months or is less 
than six months - over the term of limitation. 
Article 206. Execution of the Duty After the Expiry of the Term of the 
Limitation of Actions 
The debtor or another obligator, who has executed the duty after the expiry of the term of limitation, 
shall not have the right of regress, even if at the moment of the execution the said person was not aware 
of the expiry of the term of limitation. 
Article 207. Application of the Limitation of Actions to Supplementary Claims 
With the expiry of the term of limitation by the basic claim, that by the supplementary claims (the 
forfeit, pledge, surety, etc.) shall also expire. 
See Decision of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation and Plenum of the Higher 
Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 15/18 of November 12, 15, 2001 
Article 208. The Claims to Which the Limitation of Actions Shall Not Be Apply 
The limitation of actions shall not be apply to: - the claims for the protection of personal non-property rights and the other non-material values, 
with the exception of the cases, stipulated by the law; - the claims of the depositors to the bank on the issue of deposits; - the claims on recompensing the damage, inflicted on the life or the health of the citizen. However, 
the claims, made after the expiry of three years from the moment, when the right to the compensation of 
such damage has arisen, shall be satisfied for the past time for no more than three years, preceding the 
filing of the claim; - the claims of the owner or another possessor for the elimination of all violations of his right, even 
though these violations have not been involved in the deprivation of the possession (Article 304); - the other claims in the cases, established by the law. 
Concerning the application of terms of the limitation in family relationship see the Family Code of the 
Russian Federation No. 223-FZ of December 29, 1995 
Section II. The Right of Ownership and the Other Rights of Estate 
On some issues of court practice in the settlement of disputes concerning the defence of the ownership 
right and other property rights see Decision of the Plenary Session of the Higher Arbitration Court of 
the Russian Federation No. 8 of February 25, 1998  
Chapter 13. The General Provisions 
Article 209. The Content of the Right of Ownership 
1. The owner shall be entitled to the rights of the possession, the use and the disposal of his 
property. 
2. The owner shall have the right at his own discretion to perform with respect to the property in his 
ownership any actions, not contradicting the law and the other legal acts, and not violating the rights and 
the law-protected interests of the other persons, including the alienation of his property into the ownership 
of the other persons, the transfer to them, while himself remaining the owner of the property, of the rights 
of its possession, use and disposal, the putting of his property in pledge and its burdening in other ways, 
as well as the disposal thereof in a different manner. 
3. The possession, the use and the disposal of the land and of the other natural resources so far as 
their circulation is admitted by the law (Article 129), shall be freely effected by their owner, unless this 
inflicts damage to the natural environment or violates the rights and the legal interests of the other 
persons. 
Concerning property in land see the Law of the Russian Federation No. 2395-1 of February 21, 1992  
4. The owner may pass his property over into the confidential management, or into the trusteeship 
(to a confidential manager, or to the trustee). The transfer of the property into the confidential 
management shall not entail the transfer of the rights of ownership to the confidential manager, who shall 
be obliged to perform the management of the property in the interest of the owner or of the third person 
the owner has named. 
Article 210. The Burden of Maintaining the Property 
The owner shall bear the burden of maintaining the property in his ownership, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the law or by the contract. 
Article 211. The Risk of an Accidental Destruction of the Property 
The risk of an accidental destruction of the property or of an accidental damage inflicted on it shall 
be borne by its owner, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the contract. 
Article 212. The Subjects of the Right of Ownership 
1. In the Russian Federation shall be recognized the private, the state, the municipal and the other 
forms of ownership. 
2. The property may be in the ownership of the citizens and of the legal entities, and also of the 
Russian Federation, of the subjects of the Russian Federation and of the municipal entities. 
3. The specifics of the acquisition and of the cessation of the right of ownership to the property, of 
the possession, the use and the disposal thereof may be established only by the law, depending on whether 
the given property is in the ownership of the citizen or of the legal entity, in the ownership of the Russian 
Federation, of the subject of the Russian Federation or of the municipal entity. 
The law shall stipulate the kinds of the property, which may be only in the state or in the municipal 
ownership. 
4. The rights of all the owners shall be equally protected. 
Article 213. The Right of Ownership of the Citizens and of the Legal Entities 
1. In the ownership of the citizens and of the legal entities may be any property, with the exception 
of the individual kinds of the property, which, in conformity with the law, may not be owned by the 
citizens or by the legal entities. 
2. The amount and the cost of the property in the ownership of the citizens and of the legal entities 
shall not be limited, with the exception of the cases, when such limitations have been established by the 
law for the purposes, stipulated by Item 2, Article 1 of the present Code. 
3. The commercial and the non-profit organizations, with the exception of the state and of the 
municipal enterprises, and also of the institutions, financed by the owner, shall be the owners of the 
property, transferred to them by way of the investments (the contributions), made by their founders 
(participants, members), and also of the property, acquired by these legal entities on the other grounds. 
4. The public and the religious organizations (the associations), the charity and the other kind of 
funds shall be the owners of the property they have acquired and shall have the right to use it only for 
achieving the goals, stipulated in their constituent documents. The founders (the participants, the 
members) of these organizations shall lose the right to the property, which they have transferred into the 
ownership of the corresponding organization. In case of the liquidation of such an organization, its 
property, left after the creditors' claims have been satisfied, shall be used for the purposes, pointed out in 
its constituent documents. 
Article 214. The Right of the State Ownership 
1. The state property in the Russian Federation shall be the property, owned by the right of 
ownership by the Russian Federation (the federal, or the federally owned property), and also the property, 
owned by the right of ownership by the subjects of the Russian Federation - by the Republics, the 
territories, the regions, the cities of federal importance, by the autonomous region and by the autonomous 
areas (the property of the subject of the Russian Federation). 
2. The land and the other natural resources, which are not in the ownership of the citizens, the legal 
entities or the municipal entities, shall be the state property. 
3. On behalf of the Russian Federation and of the subjects of the Russian Federation, the rights of 
the owner shall be exercised by the bodies and by the persons, indicated in Article 125 of the present 
Code. 
4. The property, which is in the state ownership, shall be assigned to the state-run enterprises and 
institutions into the possession, the use and the disposal in conformity with the present Code (Articles 294 
and 296). 
The means of the corresponding budget and the other state property, not assigned to the state 
enterprises and institutions, shall comprise the state treasury of the Russian Federation, the treasury of the 
Republic within the Russian Federation, of the territory, the region, the city of federal importance, of the 
autonomous region and of the autonomous area. 
5. Referring the state property to the federal property and to the property of the subjects of the 
Russian Federation shall be effected in conformity with the procedure, laid down by the law. 
Article 215. The Right of the Municipal Ownership 
1. The property, belonging by the right of ownership to the urban and to the rural settlements, and to 
the other municipal entities, shall be the municipal property. 
2. On behalf of the municipal entity, the rights of the owner shall be exercised by the local self
government bodies and by the persons, indicated in Article 125 of the present Code. 
3. The property in the municipal ownership shall be assigned to the municipal enterprises and to the 
institutions into the possession, the use and the disposal in conformity with the present Code (Articles 294 
and 296). 
The means of the local budget and the other municipal property, not assigned to the municipal 
enterprises and to the institutions, shall comprise the municipal treasury of the corresponding urban or 
rural settlement or of the other municipal entity. 
Article 216. The Rights of Estate of the Persons, Who Are Not the Owners 
1. The rights of estate shall be, alongside the right of ownership: - the right of the inherited life possession of the land plot (Article 265); - the right of the permanent (perpetual) use of the land plot (Article 268); - the servitudes (Articles 274 and 277); - the right of the economic management of the property (Article 294) and the right of the operation 
management of the property (Article 296). 
2. The rights of estate to the property may be possessed by the persons, who are not the owners of 
this property. 
3. The transfer of the right of the ownership to the property to the other person shall not be a ground 
for the cessation of the other rights of estate to this property. 
4. The rights of estate of the person, who is not the owner of the property, shall be protected from 
their violation by any person in the order, stipulated by Article 305 of the present Code. 
Article 217. Privatization of the State and of the Municipal Property 
The property in the state or in the municipal ownership may be transferred by its owner into the 
ownership of the citizens and of the legal entities in the order, stipulated by the laws on the privatization 
of the state and of the municipal property. 
In the course of the privatization of the state and of the municipal property, the provisions, 
stipulated by the present Code, which regulate the order of the acquisition and of the cessation of the right 
of ownership, shall be applied, unless otherwise stipulated by the laws on the privatization. 
Chapter 14. The Acquisition of the Right of Ownership 
Article 218. The Grounds for the Acquisition of the Right of Ownership 
1. The right of ownership to a new thing, manufactured or created by the person for himself, while 
abiding by the law and by the other legal acts, shall be acquired by this person. 
The right of ownership to the fruits, the products and the incomes, derived through the use of the 
property, shall be acquired on the grounds, stipulated by Article 136 of the present Code. 
2. The right of ownership to the property, which has its owner, may be acquired by the other person 
on the grounds of the contract of the purchase and sale, of the exchange and of making a gift, or on the 
ground of another kind of the deal on the alienation of this property. 
In the case of the citizen's death, the right of ownership to the property he has owned shall pass by 
the right of succession to the other persons in conformity with the will or with the law. 
In the case of the reorganization of the legal entity, the right of ownership to the property it has 
owned shall pass to the legal entities, which are the legal successors of the reorganized legal entity. 
3. In the cases and in the order, stipulated by the present Code, the person may acquire the right of 
ownership to the ownerless property, to the property, whose owner is unknown, and to the property, 
which the owner has renounced or to which he has lost the right of ownership on the other law-stipulated 
grounds. 
4. The member of the housing, housing-construction, country cottage, garage or another kind of the 
consumer cooperative, and also the other persons, enjoying the right to make share accumulations, who 
have paid up in full their share contribution for the flat, the country cottage, the garage or the other 
quarters, given to these persons by the cooperative, shall acquire the right of ownership to the said 
property. 
Article 219. Arising of the Right of Ownership to the Newly Created Realty 
The right of ownership to the buildings, the structures and the other newly created realty, subject to 
the state registration, shall arise from the moment of such registration. 
About state registration of the right to a newly-established object of immovable property see Federal 
Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997 
Article 220. The Processing 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract, the right of ownership to a new movable thing, which 
the person has manufactured by processing the materials he does not own, shall be acquired by the owner 
of the materials. 
However, if the cost of the processing essentially exceeds the cost of the materials, the right of 
ownership to the new thing shall be acquired by the person who, while acting in good faith, has effected 
the processing for himself. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract, the owner of the materials, who has acquired the right 
of ownership to the thing, manufactured from them, shall be obliged to recompense the cost of the 
processing to the person, who has performed it, and in the case of the right of ownership to the new thing 
being acquired by the latter, this person shall be obliged to recompense the cost of the materials to their 
owner. 
3. The owner of the materials, who has been deprived of them as a result of the actions in bad faith 
of the person, who has executed the processing, shall have the right to claim that the new thing be 
transferred into his ownership and that the losses, inflicted upon him, be compensated. 
Article 221. Turning into the Ownership of the Objects, Generally Available for 
Collection 
In the cases, when in conformity with the law or with the general permission of the owner, or in 
conformity with the local custom, in the woods, in the water bodies or on the other territory, the berry
picking, fishing, gathering, extraction, hunting and trapping of the generally available objects and animals 
is admitted, the right of ownership to the corresponding objects shall belong to the person, who has 
performed these actions. 
Article 222. The Unauthorized Structure 
1. The unauthorized structure shall be a living house and any other building or structure, erected on 
the land plot, which has not been allotted for this purpose in conformity with the order, established by the 
law or by the other legal acts, or that erected without having obtained the necessary permit to this effect, 
or that built with the substantial violation of the norms and rules, laid down for the town-development and 
construction. 
2. The person, who has built an unauthorized structure, shall not acquire the right of ownership to it. 
He shall have no right to dispose of the said structure, i.e., to sell it, to make a gift of it, to give it in rent 
and to perform the other deals with it. 
The unauthorized structure shall be subject to demolition by the person, who has erected it, or at his 
expense, with the exception of the cases, stipulated by Item 3 of the present Article. 
3. The right of ownership to the unauthorized structure may be recognized by the court in the 
person, who has erected it on the land plot he does not own, on the condition that the given land plot shall 
be allotted to this person in conformity with the established order for the structure built on it. 
About state registration of the rights to immovable property established by decision of a court see 
Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997 
The right of ownership to an unauthorized structure may be recognized by the court in the person, in 
whose ownership, inherited life possession or permanent (perpetual) use the land plot, on which the said 
structure has been built, is situated. In this case, the person, whose right of ownership to the structure has 
been recognized, shall recompense the expenses, involved in its erection, to the person, who has built it, 
in the amount, defined by the court. 
The right of ownership to the unauthorized structure shall not be adjudged to the said persons, if the 
maintenance of the structure infringes upon the rights and the law-stipulated interests of the other persons 
or if it jeopardizes the citizens' life and health. 
Article 223. The Moment of the Right of Ownership Arising in the Acquirer by 
the Contract 
1. The right of ownership shall arise in the acquirer of the thing from the moment of its transfer, 
unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the contract. 
Federal Law No. 217-FZ of December 30, 2004 amended Item 2 of Article 223 of this Code. The 
amendments shall come into force as of January 1, 2005 
See the previous text of the Item 
2. In the cases, when the alienation of the property is subject to the state registration, the right of 
ownership shall arise with the buyer from the moment of such registration, unless otherwise established 
by the law. 
Immovable property shall be declared belonging to a good faith acquirer (Item 1 of Article 302) on 
the right of ownership from the moment of such registration, except for the cases stipulated by Article 
302 of this Code when the owner has the right to recover such property from a good faith acquirer. 
Article 224. The Transfer of the Thing 
1. The transfer shall be recognized as the handing in of the thing to the acquirer, and also as the 
handing in to a transporter for the delivery to the acquirer or the passing to a communications agency for 
forwarding to the acquirer of the things, alienated without an obligation of delivery. 
The thing shall be regarded as handed in to the acquirer from the moment of its actually being 
placed into the possession of the acquirer or of the person, whom he has named. 
2. If by the moment of concluding the contract on the alienation of the thing it has already been 
placed into the acquirer's possession, it shall be regarded as transferred to him from this moment. 
3. The transfer of the thing shall be equalized to the transfer of the bill of lading or of another 
document of title to the thing. 
Article 225. Ownerless Things 
1. The thing shall be recognized as ownerless, if it has no owner, or if its owner is unknown, of if he 
has renounced his right of ownership to the said thing. 
2. Unless this is excluded by the rules of the present Code on the acquisition of the right of 
ownership to the things, which have been renounced by the owner (Article 226), on the find (Articles 227 
and 228), on the neglected animals (Articles 230 and 231) and on the treasure (Article 233), the right of 
ownership to the ownerless movables may be acquired by force of the acquisitive prescription. 
3. The ownerless immovable things shall be registered by the body, engaged in the state registration 
of the right to the realty, upon the application of the local self-government body, on whose territory they 
are situated. 
After the expiry of one year from the day of registration of the ownerless immovable thing, the 
body, authorized to manage the municipal property, may file a claim with the court for recognizing the 
municipal ownership to the given thing. 
About state registration of the rights to immovable property established by decision of a court see 
Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997 
The ownerless immovable thing, which has not been recognized by the court ruling as given into the 
municipal ownership, may once again be accepted into the possession, the use and the disposal by its 
owner, who has formerly left it, or it may be acquired into ownership by force of the acquisitive 
prescription. 
Article 226. The Movables, Renounced by the Owner 
1. The movable things, abandoned by their owner, or left by him in another way with the purpose of 
renouncing his right of their ownership (the abandoned things), may be turned by the other persons into 
their ownership in conformity with the order, stipulated by Item 2 of the present Article. 
2. The person, in whose ownership, possession or use is the land plot, water body or another object, 
where the abandoned thing, which costs obviously less than the sum, corresponding to the five-fold 
minimum amount of the remuneration of labour, and also the abandoned metal scrap, the rejected 
products, the sinken logs in the floating, the dumps and the drains formed in the extraction of minerals, 
the production and the other kind of wastes are located, shall have the right to turn these things into his 
ownership by starting to use them, or by performing the other actions, testifying to the thing being turned 
into ownership. 
The other abandoned things shall go into the ownership of the person, who has entered into their 
possession, if, upon the application of this person, the court has recognized them as ownerless. 
Article 227. The Find 
1. The person, who has found a lost thing, shall be obliged to immediately notify about this the 
person, who has lost it, or the person, who is its owner, or somebody else from among the persons he 
knows, who have the right to obtain it, and to return the thing he has found to this person. 
If the thing has been found indoors or in a transport vehicle, it shall be subject to being handed over 
to the person, representing the owner of the quarters or of the transport vehicle in question. In this case, 
the person, to whom the find has been handed over, shall acquire the rights and shall discharge the 
obligations of the person, who has found the thing. 
2. If the person, who has the right to claim that the found thing be returned to him, or the place of 
his stay is not known, the person, who has found the thing, shall be obliged to declare the find to the 
militia or to the local self-government body. 
3. The person, who has found the thing, shall have the right to keep it or to give it for keeping to the 
militia, to the local self-government body, or to the person these have pointed out. 
The perishable thing or the thing, the cost of whose storage is inordinately great compared with its 
cost, may be realized by the person, who has found it; the latter shall obtain a written proof of the 
earnings he has derived. The money, received from the sale of the find, shall be subject to the return to the 
person, legally entitled to obtain it. 
4. The person, who has found the thing, shall be answerable for the said thing's loss or damage only 
in the case of an evil intent or of a flagrant carelessness on his part, and then only within the limits of its 
cost. 
Article 228. Acquisition of the Right of Ownership to the Find 
1. If in the course of six months from the moment of the declaration of the find to the militia or to 
the local self-government body (Item 2 of Article 227), the person, legally entitled to obtain the found 
thing, is not identified, or does not himself declare his right to the thing to the person, who has found it, to 
the militia or to the self-government body, the person, who has found it, shall acquire the right of 
ownership to the given thing. 
2. In case the person, who has found the thing, refuses to acquire the found thing into his ownership, 
it shall be turned into the municipal ownership. 
Article 229. Compensation of the Expenses, Involved in the Find, and the 
Reward to the Person, Who Has Found It 
1. The person, who has found and returned the thing to the person, legally entitled to obtain it, shall 
have the right to receive from this person, and in case the thing is turned into the municipal ownership - 
from the corresponding local self-government body, the compensation of the necessary expenses, 
involved in the keeping, handing in or realization of the thing, as well as the outlays he has made in his 
efforts to discover the person, who has the right to obtain the thing. 
2. The person, who has found the thing, shall have the right to claim from the person, legally 
entitled to obtain it, the reward for the find, amounting to up to 20 per cent of its cost. If the found thing 
presents a value only to the person, legally entitled to obtain it, the amount of the reward shall be defined 
by an agreement with this person. 
The right to the reward shall not arise, if the person, who has found the thing, has not declared the 
find or has tried to conceal it. 
Article 230. The Neglected Animals 
1. The person, who has detained the neglected or stray cattle or the other neglected domestic 
animals, shall be obliged to return them to the owner, and if the owner of the animals or the place of his 
stay is not known, shall declare, within three days from the moment of their detention, about his finding 
the said animals to the militia or to the local self-government body, which shall take measures to find 
their owner. 
2. The person, who has detained the animals, may maintain and use them during the time, required 
to find their owner, or turn them over for the maintenance and use to another person, disposing of the 
necessary facilities. By the request of the person, who has detained the neglected animals, the search for a 
person, who disposes of the necessary facilities for their maintenance, and the transfer of the said animals 
to this person shall be effected by the militia or by the local self-government body. 
3. The person, who has detained the neglected animals, and also that person, to whom they have 
been turned over for the maintenance and for the use, shall be obliged to keep them properly and shall be 
answerable for their perish and for the harm done to the animals through their fault within the limits of the 
animals' cost. 
Article 231. Acquisition of the Right of Ownership to the Neglected Animals 
1. If, in the course of six months from the moment, when the declaration about the detention of the 
neglected animals was made, their owner has not been found or has not himself claimed his right to them, 
the person, in whose maintenance and use the animals have been, shall acquire the right of ownership to 
them. 
In case this person has refused to acquire the right of ownership to the animals in his maintenance, 
they shall be turned into the municipal ownership and shall be used in conformity with the procedure, laid 
down by the local self-government body. 
2. If the former owner of the animals turns up after their being passed over into the ownership of 
another person, the former owner shall have the right, in case the said animals are showing the signs of 
affection for him, or in case the new owner treats them cruelly or improperly, to claim that they be 
returned to him on the terms, defined by an agreement with the new owner, and if it is impossible to reach 
such an agreement - on the terms, ruled by the court. 
Article 232. Compensation of the Expenses Involved in Keeping Neglected 
Animals and the Reward for Them 
In case the neglected domestic animals are returned to the owner, the person, who has detained the 
animals, and also the person, in whose maintenance and use they have been, shall be entitled to the 
compensation by the owner of their outlays on the maintenance of the animals, with offsetting the profits, 
derived from their use. 
The person, who has detained the neglected domestic animals, shall have the right to the reward in 
conformity with Item 2 of Article 229 of the present Code. 
Article 233. The Treasure 
1. The treasure, i.e., the money or the other valuable things, buried underground or hidden away in 
any other manner, whose owner cannot be identified or, by force of the law, has lost the right to them, 
shall be turned into the ownership of the person, who is the owner of the property (the land plot, the 
building, etc.), where the treasure was hidden, and of the person, who has discovered the treasure, in 
equal shares, unless another kind of agreement has been reached between them. 
In case the treasure is discovered by the person, who has been performing excavation work or the 
search for valuables without obtaining a permission to this effect from the owner of the land plot or of the 
other property, where it was hidden, the treasure shall be subject to the transfer to the owner of the land 
plot or of the other property, where the treasure was discovered. 
2. In case of discovering a treasure, containing things, which have a bearing to the monuments of 
culture or history, they shall be handed over into the state ownership. The owner of the land plot or of the 
other kind of property, where the treasure was hidden, and the person, who has discovered the treasure, 
shall be together entitled to a reward, amounting to 50 per cent of the cost of the treasure. The reward 
shall be divided between these persons in equal shares, unless another kind of agreement has been 
reached between them. 
In case the treasure has been discovered by the person, who has performed excavation work or the 
search for valuables without the consent of the owner of the property, where the treasure was hidden, the 
reward shall not be paid to this person and shall be paid in full to the property owner. 
3. The rules of the present Article shall not be applied to the persons, who have been engaged in the 
excavation work and in the search, aimed at the discovery of the treasure, by force of such duties being 
included within the range of their labour or official duties. 
Article 234. Acquisitive Prescription 
1. The person - the citizen or the legal entity - who is not the owner of the property, but who has, in 
good faith, openly and uninterruptedly, possessed the realty as his own immovable property in the course 
of fifteen years, or any other property in the course of five years, shall acquire the right of ownership to 
this property (the acquisitive prescription). 
The right of ownership to the realty and to the other property, subject to the state registration, shall 
arise in the person, who has acquired this property by force of the acquisitive prescription, from the 
moment of such registration. 
2. Before the acquisition of the right of ownership to the property by force of the acquisitive 
prescription, the person, possessing the given property as his own, shall have the right to protect his 
possession against the third persons, who are not the owners of the said property, and also against those, 
who have no rights to its possession on the other grounds, stipulated by the law or by the agreement. 
3. The person, referring to the long term of possession, may add to the period of his possession the 
entire period of time, in the course of which the property has been possessed by the person, whose legal 
successor the given person is. 
4. The proceeding of the term of the acquisitive prescription with respect to the things, which are in 
the custody of the person, from whose possession they could be claimed in conformity with Articles 301 
and 305 of the present Code, shall start not earlier than after the expiry of the term of the limitation of 
actions by the corresponding claims. 
Chapter 15. The Cessation of the Right of Ownership 
Article 235. The Grounds for the Cessation of the Right of Ownership 
1. The right of ownership shall cease with the alienation by the owner of his property in favour of 
the other persons, with the owner's renouncement of his right of ownership, with the perish or the 
destruction of the property and with the loss of the right of ownership in the other law-stipulated cases. 
2. The forcible withdrawal of the property from the owner shall not be admitted, with the exception 
of the cases, when, on the law-stipulated grounds, shall be effected: 
1) the turning of the penalty onto the property by the obligations (Article 237); 
2) the alienation of the property, which by force of the law may not be owned by the given person 
(Article 238); 
3) the alienation of the realty in connection with the withdrawal of the land plot (Article 239); 
4) the redemption of the mismanaged cultural values and of domestic animals (Articles 240 and 
241); 
5) the requisition (Article 242); 
6) the confiscation (Article 243); 
7) the alienation of the property in the cases, stipulated by Item 4, Article 252, by Item 2, Article 
272, and by Articles 282, 285 and 293 of the present Code. 
By the owner's decision and in conformity with the procedure, stipulated by the laws on the 
privatization, the property, which is in the state or in the municipal ownership, shall be alienated into the 
ownership of the citizens and of the legal entities. 
The turning into the state ownership of the property, which is in the ownership of the citizens and of 
the legal entities (the nationalization), shall be effected on the ground of the law with the recompensing of 
the cost of this property and of the other losses in conformity with the procedure, laid down by Article 
306 of the present Code. 
Article 236. Renouncement of the Right of Ownership 
The citizen or the legal entity may renounce the right of ownership to the property in his (its) 
ownership by announcing this or by performing the other actions, definitely testifying to his abstaining 
from the possession, the use and the disposal of the property without an intention to preserve any rights to 
this property. 
The renouncement of the right of ownership shall not entail the cessation of the rights and duties of 
the owner with respect to the corresponding property until the right of ownership to it is acquired by the 
other person. 
Article 237. Turning of the Penalty onto the Property by the Owner's 
Obligations 
1. The withdrawal of the property by way of turning onto it the penalty by the owner's obligations 
shall be effected on the grounds of the court decision, unless the other order of turning the penalty is 
stipulated by the law or by the agreement. 
2. The right of ownership to the property, onto which the penalty has been turned, shall cease in its 
owner from the moment, when the right of ownership to the withdrawn property arises in the person, to 
whom this property is transferred. 
About state registration of the rights to immovable property established by decision of a court see 
Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997 
Article 238. Cessation of the Right of Ownership to the Property in the Person, 
Who May Not Own It 
1. If on the grounds, admitted by the law, in the ownership of the person has been found the 
property, which he may not own by force of the law, this property shall be alienated by the owner in the 
course of one year from the moment of the arising of the right of ownership to the property, unless the 
law has established another term. 
2. In the cases, when the property has not been alienated by the owner within the term, established 
by Item 1 of the present Article, such property, with account for its nature and purpose, shall be subject, 
in accordance with the court decision, passed upon the application of the state body or of the local self
government body, to the forcible sale with the transfer to the former owner of the money, derived from 
this sale, or to the transfer into the state or into the municipal ownership, with the compensation to the 
former owner of the cost of the property, defined by the court. The outlays, involved in the alienation of 
the property, shall be detracted. 
3. If, on the grounds, admitted by the law, in the ownership of the person or of the legal entity has 
been found the thing, for the acquisition of which a special permit is required, while its issue has been 
refused to the owner, this thing shall be subject to alienation in the order, established for the property, 
which may not be owned by the given owner. 
Article 239. Alienation of the Realty in Connection with the Withdrawal of the 
Land Plot, on Which It Is Situated 
1. In the cases, when the withdrawal of the land plot for the state or for the municipal needs, or 
because of the improper use of land, is impossible without the cessation of the right of ownership to the 
buildings, the structures or the other immovable property, situated on the given land plot, this property 
may be withdrawn from the owner by way of its redemption by the state or by way of its sale at a public 
auction in conformity with the procedure, stipulated, correspondingly, by Articles 279-282 and 284-286 
of the present Code. 
The claim for the withdrawal of the immovable property shall not be liable to satisfaction, if the 
state body or the local self-government body, which has filed this claim with the court, does not prove 
that the use of the land plot for the purposes, for which it is being withdrawn, would be impossible, unless 
the right of ownership to the given immovable property is terminated. 
2. The rules of the present Article shall correspondingly be applied, when the rights of ownership to 
the immovable property are terminated in connection with the withdrawal of the allotted mountain land 
plots, aquatorium sections and the other land plots, on which the given property is situated. 
Article 240. Redemption of the Mismanaged Cultural Values 
In the cases, when the owner of the cultural values, referred in conformity with the law to those 
particularly valuable and protected by the law, carelessly maintains these values, as a result of which they 
may lose their importance, such values may be withdrawn from the owner in accordance with the court 
decision, by way of their redemption by the state or by their sale at an open auction. 
In case of the redemption of the cultural values, the owner shall be recompensed their cost in the 
amount, fixed by the agreement between the parties, and in the case of a dispute arising between them - 
by the court. If the values are sold at an open auction, the owner shall receive the earnings from the sale, 
less the outlays for holding the auction. 
Article 241. Redemption of the Domestic Animals in Case of Their Improper 
Treatment 
In the cases, when the owner's treatment of the domestic animals is in glaring contradiction with the 
rules of the humane attitude toward the animals, established on the ground of the rules and norms, 
accepted in society, these animals may be withdrawn from the owner by way of their redemption by the 
person, who has filed the corresponding claim with the court. The redemption price shall be defined by 
the agreement between the parties, and in case of a dispute arising between them - by the court. 
Article 242. Requisition 
1. In case of the natural calamities, the accidents, the epidemics or the epizootics, and under the 
other circumstances of an extraordinary nature, the property may be, in the interest of society and by the 
decision of the state bodies, withdrawn from the owner in accordance with the procedure and on the 
terms, laid down by the law, with the cost of the requisitioned property paid out to him (the requisition). 
2. The estimate, according to which the owner shall be paid the cost of the requisitioned property, 
may be disputed by him in the court. 
3. The person, whose property has been requisitioned, shall have the right to claim through the court 
the return to him of the preserved property, if the circumstances, in connection with which the requisition 
was performed, have ceased to operate. 
Article 243. Confiscation 
1. In the law-stipulated cases, the property may be withdrawn from the owner without any 
compensation in accordance with the court decision as a sanction, inflicted for his committing a crime or 
another violation of the law (the confiscation). 
2. In the law-stipulated cases, the confiscation may be carried out in the administrative order. The 
decision on the confiscation, adopted in the administrative order, may be appealed against in the court. 
Chapter 16. The Common Property 
Article 244. The Concept and the Grounds for the Common Property to Arise 
1. The property, which is in the ownership of two or of several persons, shall belong to them by the 
right of common ownership. 
2. The property may be in the common ownership, with the share of each of the owners in the right 
of ownership defined (the share ownership), or not defined (the joint ownership). 
3. The common ownership of the property shall be the share ownership, with the exception of the 
cases, when the law stipulates the formation of the joint ownership to this property. 
4. The common ownership shall arise when into the ownership of two or of several persons falls the 
property, which cannot be divided without changing its intended purpose (the indivisible things) or which 
shall not be subject to division by force of the law. 
The common ownership of the divisible property shall arise in the cases, stipulated by the law or by 
an agreement. 
5. By an agreement between the participants in the joint ownership, and if no agreement can be 
reached - by the court decision, the share ownership to the common property may be established. 
Article 245. Definition of the Shares in the Right of the Share Ownership 
1. If the shares of the participants in the share ownership cannot be defined on the ground of the law 
and have not been established by an agreement between all its participants, the shares shall be regarded as 
equal. 
2. By an agreement between all the participants in the share ownership, the order of defining and 
amending their shares, which would depend on the contribution of each of them into the formation and 
the increment of the common property, may be established. 
3. The participant in the share ownership, who has effected at his own expense and with the 
observation of the order, established for the use of the common property, the inseparable improvements in 
this property, shall be entitled to the corresponding increase of his share in the right of ownership to the 
common property. 
The separable improvements, made in the common property, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
agreement between the participants in the common property, shall be the property of that of the 
participants, who has effected them. 
Article 246. Disposal of the Property in the Share Ownership 
1. The disposal of the property, which is in the share ownership, shall be effected in accordance with 
the agreement between all its participants. 
2. The participant in the share ownership shall have the right at his own discretion to sell, to make a 
gift of, to leave by will, or to pledge his share, or to dispose of it in any other way, with the observation in 
its gratuitous alienation of the rules, stipulated by Article 250 of the present Code. 
Article 247. Possession and Use of the Property in the Share Ownership 
1. The possession and the use of the property, which is in the share ownership, shall be effected in 
accordance with an agreement between all its participants, and in case such an agreement cannot be 
reached - in accordance with the order, ruled by the court. 
2. The participant in the share ownership shall have the right to put into his possession and use the 
part of the common property, proportionate to his share, and in case of this being impossible, he shall 
have the right to claim the corresponding compensation from the other participants, who possess and use 
the property, comprising his share. 
Article 248. The Fruits, Products and Incomes from the Use of the Property in 
the Share Ownership 
The fruits, products and incomes, derived from the use of the property, which is in the share 
ownership, shall comprise the common property and shall be distributed between the participants in the 
share ownership proportionately to their shares, unless otherwise stipulated by an agreement between 
them. 
Article 249. Expenses Involved in the Maintenance of the Property in the Share 
Ownership 
Every participant in the share ownership shall be obliged to take part, proportionately to his share, in 
the payment of the taxes, collections and other dues by the common property, as well as in the expenses, 
involved in its maintenance and storage. 
Article 250. Preferential Right of the Purchase 
1. In case a share in the right of the common ownership is sold to an outsider, the rest of the 
participants in the share ownership shall have the right of priority in the purchase of the share on sale for 
the price, for which it is being sold, and on the other equal terms, with the exception of the case, when it 
is being sold at an open auction. 
An open auction for the sale of the share in the right of the common ownership in the absence of the 
consent to it of all the participants in the share ownership, may be held in the cases, stipulated by the 
second part of Article 255 of the present Code, and also in the other law-stipulated cases. 
2. The seller of the share shall be obliged to notify in written form the rest of the participants in the 
share ownership about his intention to sell his share to an outsider, with an indication of the price and of 
the other terms, on which he is selling his share. If the rest of the participants in the share ownership 
refuse to buy it or do not acquire the share in the right of the ownership to the immovable property, 
offered for sale, in the course of one month, and in the right of the ownership to the movable property - 
within ten days from the date of notification, the seller shall have the right to sell his share to any person. 
3. If the share is sold with a violation of the right of priority to the purchase, any other participant in 
the share ownership shall have the right to claim through the court, in the course of three months, that the 
buyer's rights and duties be transferred to him. 
4. The cession of the right of priority to the purchase of the share shall not be admitted. 
5. The rules of the present Article shall also be applied in case of the alienation of the share by a 
barter agreement. 
Article 251. The Moment of the Transfer of the Share in the Right of the 
Common Ownership to the Acquirer by the Contract 
The share in the right of the common ownership shall be transferred to the acquirer by the contract 
from the moment of its conclusion, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement between the parties. 
The moment of the share in the right of the common ownership being transferred by the contract, 
which is subject to the state registration, shall be defined in conformity with Item 2 of Article 223 of the 
present Code. 
Article 252. Division of the Property in the Share Ownership and the Setting 
Apart of a Share from It 
1. The property, which is in the share ownership, may be divided between its participants by an 
agreement between them. 
2. The participant in the share ownership shall have the right to claim that his share be set apart from 
the common property. 
3. If the participants in the share ownership have failed to come to an agreement on the way and the 
terms for the division of the common property or for the setting apart of the share of one of the 
participants, the participant in the share ownership shall have the right to claim through the court that his 
share be set apart from the common property in kind. 
If the setting apart of the share in kind is not admitted by the law or is impossible without causing an 
inordinate harm to the property in the common ownership, the withdrawing owner shall have the right to 
the payment out to him of the cost of his share by the other participants in the share ownership. 
4. The rift between the property, set apart in kind to the participant in the share ownership on the 
ground of the present Article, and his share in the right of ownership shall be eliminated by paying out to 
him of the corresponding sum of money or by the other kind of compensation. 
The payment out to the participant in the share ownership by the rest of the participants of a 
compensation instead of the setting apart of his share in kind, shall be admitted only with his consent. In 
case the owner's share is insignificant, cannot be realistically set apart and he doesn't display a serious 
interest in the use of the common property, the court may obligate the rest of the participants in the share 
ownership to pay him out the compensation even in the absence of his consent. 
5. Upon the receipt of the compensation in conformity with the present Article, the owner shall lose 
the right to a share in the common property. 
Article 253. Possession, Use and Disposal of the Property in the Joint 
Ownership 
1. The participants in the joint ownership, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement between 
them, shall possess and use the common property jointly. 
2. The property in the joint ownership shall be disposed of by the consent of all the participants, 
which shall be presumed regardless of which particular participant performs the deal, involved in the 
disposal of the property. 
3. Each of the participants in the joint ownership shall have the right to perform the deals, involved 
in the disposal of the common property, unless otherwise following from the agreement between all the 
participants. The deal, effected by one of the participants in the joint ownership, involved in the disposal 
of the common property, may be recognized as invalid upon the demand of the rest of the participants for 
the reason of the participant, who has made the deal, not having the necessary powers, only if it has been 
proved that the other party to the deal has known, or should have known, about it. 
4. The rules of the present Article shall be applied so far as no other rules have been laid down for 
the individual kinds of the joint ownership by the present Code or by the other laws. 
Concerning possession, use and disposal of the joint property of spouses see the Family Code of the 
Russian Federation No. 223-FZ of December 29, 1995 
Article 254. Division of the Property in the Joint Ownership and the Setting 
Apart of a Share from It 
1. The division of the common property between the participants in the joint ownership, as well as 
the setting apart of the share of one of them may be effected after making a preliminary estimate of the 
share of each of the participants in the right to the common property. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the agreement between the participants, when 
dividing the common property and setting apart a share from it, their shares shall be recognized as equal. 
3. The grounds and the order for the division of the common property and for the setting apart of a 
share from it shall be defined according to the rules of Article 252 of the present Code, so far as no other 
rules have been laid down for the individual kinds of the joint ownership by the present Code and by the 
other laws or follow from the substance of the relationships between the participants in the joint 
ownership. 
Concerning division of the joint property of spouses see the Family Code of the Russian Federation 
No. 223-FZ of December 29, 1995 
Article 255. Turning of the Penalty onto the Share in the Common Property 
The creditor of the participant in the share or in the joint ownership shall have the right, in case the 
given owner's other property proves to be insufficient, to claim the setting apart of the debtor's share in 
the common property for turning the penalty onto it. 
If in such cases the setting apart of the share in kind is impossible or if the rest of the participants in 
the share or in the joint ownership object to it, the creditor shall have the right to claim the sale by the 
debtor of this share to the rest of the participants of the common property for the price, proportionate to 
the market cost of this share, with the means, derived from the sale, going to service the debt. 
In case of the refusal of the rest of the participants in the common ownership to acquire the debtor's 
share, the creditor shall have the right to claim through the court that the penalty be turned onto the 
debtor's share in the right of the common ownership by way of selling this share at an open auction. 
Article 256. The Community Property 
1. The property, accumulated by the spouses during their married life, shall be their joint, or 
community property, unless another regime has been established for this property by an agreement 
between them. 
2. The property, which was owned by each of the spouses before they entered into the marriage, or 
that received by one of the spouses during their married life as a gift or by inheritance, shall be the 
property of this particular spouse. 
The things of personal use (such as the clothes, the footwear, etc.), with the exception of the jewels 
and the other luxury goods, even though acquired during the married life at the expense of the spouses' 
common means, shall be recognized as the property of that spouse, who has used them. 
The property of each of the spouses may be recognized as their joint property, if it has been 
established that during their married life, at the expense of the common property of the spouses or of the 
personal property of the other spouse, have been made the contributions, which have essentially increased 
the cost of that property (the overhaul, the reconstruction, the re-equipment, etc.). The present rule shall 
not be applied, if otherwise stipulated by an agreement between the spouses. 
3. By the obligations of one of the spouses, the penalty may be turned only onto the property in his 
ownership and onto his share in the common property of the spouses, which should be due to him in case 
of the division of this property. 
4. The rules for defining the spouses' shares in the common property during its division and the 
order of such a division, shall be laid down by the legislation on the family and on marriage. 
Article 257. The Ownership of the Peasant (Farmer's) Economy 
1. The property of the peasant (the farmer's) economy shall belong to its members by the right of 
joint ownership, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by an agreement between them. 
2. In the joint ownership of the members of the peasant (the farmer's) economy shall be the land 
plot, assigned into the ownership of this economy or acquired, the plantations, the economic and the other 
kind of buildings, the amelioration and the other kind of structures, the productive and the draft animals, 
the poultry, the farm and the other kind of machinery and equipment, the transportation vehicles, the 
implements and the other kind of property, acquired for the economy at the expense of the common 
means of its members. 
3. The fruits, products and incomes, derived as a result of the activity of the peasant (the farmer's) 
economy, shall be the common property of the members of the peasant (the farmer's) economy and shall 
be used by an agreement between them. 
Article 258. Division of the Peasant (the Farmer's) Economy 
1. Upon the termination of the peasant (the farmer's) economy in connection with the retirement of 
all its members or on the other grounds, the common property shall be subject to division in accordance 
with the rules, stipulated by Articles 252 and 254 of the present Code. 
The land plot in such cases shall be divided according to the rules, established by the present Code 
and by the land legislation. 
2. The land plot and the means of production, belonging to the peasant (the farmer's) economy, shall 
not be subject to division in case of the retirement of one of its members. The retired member shall have 
the right to receive the money compensation, proportionate to his share in the common ownership of this 
property. 
3. In the cases, stipulated by the present Article, the shares of the members of the peasant (the 
farmer's) economy in the right of the joint ownership to the property of the economy shall be recognized 
as equal, unless otherwise stipulated by an agreement between them. 
Article 259. The Ownership of the Economic Partnership or of the Cooperative, 
Based on the Property of the Peasant (the Farmer's) Economy 
1. The members of the peasant (the farmer's) economy may set up, on the basis of the economy's 
property, an economic partnership or a production cooperative. Such an economic partnership or a 
cooperative as a legal entity shall possess the right of ownership to the property, transferred to it in the 
form of investments and other contributions by the members of the peasant (the farmer's) economy, and 
also to the property, which has resulted from its activity or has been acquired on the other grounds, 
admitted by the law. 
2. The size of the contributions of the participants in the partnership or of the members of the 
cooperative, set up on the basis of the peasant (the farmer's) economy, shall be fixed, proceeding form 
their shares in the right of the common ownership to the economy's property, to be defined according to 
Item 3 of Article 258 of the present Code. 
Federal Law No. 45-FZ of April 16, 2001 reworded the name of Chapter 17  
See the previous text of the name 
Land Code of the Russian Federation shall come into force as of the day of its official publication 
Federal Law No. 101-FZ of July 24, 2002 On Farm Land Circulation shall enter into force in six 
months after official publication thereof  
Chapter 17. Right of Ownership and Other Real Rights to Land 
Article 260. The General Provisions on the Right of Ownership to the Land 
1. The persons, having in their ownership a land plot, shall have the right to sell it, to make a gift of 
it, to pledge it or to give it in rent, and to dispose of it in any other way (Article 209), so far as the 
corresponding lands have not been withdrawn from, or restricted in the circulation in conformity with the 
law. 
2. On the ground of the law and of the law-established order, shall be defined the lands, intended for 
agricultural and other purposes, whose use for the different purposes is not admitted or is restricted. The 
land plot, referred to this category of lands, may be used within the limits, defined by its intended 
purpose. 
On legal regulating of alienation of agricultural-purpose land, see Federal Law No. 137-FZ of 
October 25, 2001  
Article 261. The Land Plot as an Object of the Right of Ownership 
1. The territorial boundaries of the land plot shall be delineated in conformity with the order, 
established by the land legislation, on the grounds of the documents, issued to the owner by the state 
bodies, responsible for the land resources and for the organization of the use of land. 
2. Unless otherwise decreed by the law, the right of ownership to the land plot shall be spread to the 
surface (the soil) layer, the closed water bodies, the forests and the other plants, situated within the 
boundaries of this land plot. 
3. The owner of the land plot shall have the right to use at his own discretion everything, which is 
over and under the surface of this land plot, unless otherwise stipulated by the laws on the mineral wealth 
and on the use of the air space and by the other laws, and so far as it does not violate the rights of the 
other persons. 
Article 262. The Land Plots of the Common Use. Access to the Land Plot 
1. The citizens shall have the right to freely pass, without being obliged to draw any permits, to the 
land plots, which have not been closed for the common access, in the state or in the municipal ownership, 
and to use the natural objects, located on these plots within the limits, admitted by the law and by the 
other legal acts, as well as by the owner of the corresponding land plot. 
2. Unless the land plot has been fenced off or its owner has clearly indicated that no trespassing is 
admitted without his permission, any person shall have the right to walk across the land plot under the 
condition that this does not inflict a loss or cause worry to the owner. 
Article 263. Construction on the Land Plot 
1. The owner of the land plot shall have the right to erect on it buildings and structures, to rebuild or 
to pull them down, and also to permit the construction on his land plot to the other persons. These rights 
shall be exercised under the condition that the town-development and construction norms and rules, as 
well as the demands with regard to the intended purpose of the land plot (Item 2 of Article 260) be 
complied with. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the agreement, the owner of the land plot shall 
acquire the right of ownership to the building, the structure or the other kind of the immovable property, 
which he has erected or created for himself on the land plot in his ownership. 
The consequences of the unauthorized construction, effected by the owner on the land plot in his 
ownership, shall be defined by Article 222 of the present Code. 
Article 264. The Rights to the Land of the Persons, Who Are Not the Owners of 
the Land Plots 
1. The land plots and the immovable property, situated on them, may be given by their owners to the 
other persons into the permanent or temporary use, including in rent. 
2. The person, who is not the owner of the land plot, shall exercise the rights to the possession and 
to the use of the land plot on the terms and within the limits, laid down by the law or by the agreement 
with the owner. 
3. The possessor of the land plot, who is not the owner, shall not have the right to dispose of this 
land plot, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the agreement. 
Article 265. The Grounds for the Acquisition of the Right to the Inherited Life 
Possession of the Land Plot 
The right of the inherited life possession of the land plot, which is in the state or in the municipal 
ownership, shall be acquired by the citizens on the grounds and in the order, stipulated by the land 
legislation. 
Article 266. Possession and Use of the Land Plot by the Right of the Inherited 
Life Possession 
1. The citizen, enjoying the right of the inherited life possession (the possessor of the land plot) shall 
have the right of the possession and of the use of the land plot, which shall be passed by the right of 
succession. 
2. Unless otherwise following from the terms, established for the use of the land plot by the law, the 
owner of the land plot shall have the right to erect on it buildings and structures and to create the other 
kinds of the immovable property, acquiring to it the right of ownership. 
Article 267. Disposal of the Land Plot, Which Is in the Inherited Life 
Possession 
1. The possessor of the land plot shall have the right to give it in rent or into a gratuitous temporary 
use. 
2. The sale and the mortgage of the land plot and the performance by its owner of the other deals, 
which entail or may entail the alienation of the land plot, shall not be admitted. 
Article 268. The Grounds for the Acquisition of the Right of the Permanent 
(Perpetual) Use of the Land Plot 
1. The right of the permanent (perpetual) use of the land plot, which is in the state or in the 
municipal ownership, shall be granted to the citizens and to the legal entities on the ground of the decision 
of the state or of the municipal body, authorized to grant land plots into this kind of use. 
From the moment of the putting into effect of the Land Code of the Russian Federation No. 136-FZ of 
October 25, 2001, no land plots shall be granted to citizens for permanent (termless) use  
2. The right of the permanent use of the land plot may also be acquired by the owner of the building, 
the structure and the other kind of the immovable property in the cases, stipulated by Item 1, Article 271 
of the present Code. 
3. In case of the reorganization of the legal entity, its right of the permanent use shall be passed in 
the order of the legal succession. 
Article 269. Possession and Use of the Land by the Right of the Permanent Use 
1. The person, to whom the land plot has been given into the permanent use, shall exercise the 
possession and the use of this land plot within the limits, established by the law, by the other legal acts 
and by the act on granting the land plot into the use. 
2. The person, to whom the land plot has been granted into the permanent use, shall have the right, 
unless otherwise stipulated by the law, to independently use the land plot for the purposes, for which it 
has been granted, including the erection with these purposes in view on the land plot of the buildings, the 
structures and the other kinds of the immovable property. The buildings, the structures and the other kinds 
of the immovable property, erected by this person for himself, shall be his property. 
Article 270. Disposal of the Land Plot, Which Is in the Permanent Use 
The person, to whom the land plot has been granted into the permanent use, shall have the right to 
give this land plot in rent or into a gratuitous temporary use only upon the consent of the owner of the 
land plot. 
Article 271. The Right of the Use of the Land Plot by the Owner of the 
Immovable Property 
1. The owner of the building, of the structure or of the other kind of the realty, situated on the land 
plot, which is in the ownership of another person, shall have the right of the use to the part of the land 
plot, assigned by the latter for this realty. 
Unless otherwise following from the law, from the decision on the assignment of the land plot, 
which is in the state or in the municipal ownership, or from the agreement, the owner of the building or of 
the structure shall have the right of the permanent use of the part of the land plot (Articles 268-270), on 
which this immovable property is situated. 
2. If the right of ownership to the realty, situated on the other man's land plot, is transferred to 
another person, the latter shall acquire the right of the use of the corresponding part of the land plot on the 
same terms and in the same volume, as the former owner of the realty. 
Decree of the President of the Russian Federation No. 198 of February 14, 1996 established that the 
citizens and juridical persons that had obtained as ownership certain buildings, structures or any other 
immovables in rural localities and on the land of agricultural application may acquire as ownership 
also the land plots on which the said objects were situated, at a charge or free of charge 
The transfer of the right of ownership to the land plot shall not be the ground for the termination or 
the amendment of the right to the use of this land plot, belonging to the owner of the realty. 
3. The owner of the realty, situated on the other man's land plot, shall have the right to possess, to 
use and to dispose of this realty at his own discretion, including the pulling down of the corresponding 
buildings and structures, so far as this does not contradict the terms, laid down for the use of the given 
land plot by the law or by the agreement. 
Article 272. The Consequences of the Loss by the Realty Owner of the Right to 
the Use of the Land Plot 
1. If the right to the use of the land plot, granted to the owner of the realty, situated on this land plot, 
is terminated (Article 271), the rights to the realty, left by its owner on the land plot, shall be defined in 
conformity with an agreement between the owner of the land plot and the owner of the corresponding 
immovable property. 
2. In the absence of, or in case of the failure to reach an agreement, stipulated in Item 1 of the 
present Article, the consequences of the termination of the right to the use of the land plot shall be defined 
by the court upon the claim of the owner of the land plot or of the owner of the realty. 
The owner of the land plot shall have the right to claim through the court that the owner of the realty 
remove it from his land plot after the termination of the right to the use of the land plot and bring the land 
plot into its primary state. 
In the cases, when the demolition of the building or of the structure, situated on the land plot, is 
prohibited in conformity with the law or with the other legal acts (the living quarters, the monuments of 
culture and history, etc.), or is not subject to being effected in view of an obvious excess of the cost of the 
building or the structure over the cost of the land plot assigned for it, the court, taking into account the 
grounds for the termination of the right to the use of the land plot and in case of the corresponding claims 
being filed by the parties, shall have the right: - to recognize the right of the owner of the realty to the acquisition into ownership of the land plot, 
on which this realty is situated, or the right of the owner of the land plot to the acquisition of the realty 
left upon it, or to lay down the terms for the use of the land plot by the owner of the realty for a new 
period of time. 
3. The rules of the present Article shall not be applied, if the land plot is withdrawn for the state or 
for the municipal needs (Article 283), and also in case the rights to the land plot are terminated in view of 
its improper use (Article 286). 
Article 273. Transfer of the Right to the Land Plot in Case of the Alienation of 
the Buildings or the Structures, Situated on It 
In the transfer of the right of ownership to the building or to the structure, belonging to the owner of 
the land plot, on which it is situated, the rights to the land plot, defined by the agreement between the 
parties, shall pass to the acquirer of the building (the structure). 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement on the alienation of the building or of the structure, the 
right of the ownership to that part of the land plot, which is occupied by the building (the structure) and 
which is necessary for its use, shall also pass to the acquirer. 
Article 274. The Right of the Limited Use of the Other Person's Land Plot (the 
Servitude) 
1. The owner of the immovable property (the land plot and the other realty) shall have the right to 
claim from the owner of the neighboring land plot, and if necessary, also from the owner of yet another 
land plot (the neighboring plot) that the right of the limited use of the neighboring land plot (the 
servitude) be granted to him. 
The servitude may be established to guarantee the passage across the neighboring land plot both on 
foot and by a motor vehicle, to provide for the laying and operating of the electric power and 
communication lines, as well as of the pipelines, for the water supply and amelioration, and also for the 
other needs of the owner of the realty, which cannot be provided for without establishing the servitude. 
2. The burdening of the land plot with the servitude shall not deprive the owner of the land plot of 
the rights of the possession, the use and the disposal of this land plot. 
3. The servitude shall be established by an agreement between the person, claiming the institution of 
the servitude, and the owner of the neighboring land plot, and shall be subject to the registration in 
conformity with the procedure, laid down for the registration of the immovable property. In case of the 
failure to reach an agreement on the establishment or on the terms of the servitude, the dispute shall be 
resolved by the court upon the claim of person, demanding that the servitude be instituted. 
About state registration of servitudes see Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 
21, 1997  
4. On the terms and in conformity with the order, stipulated by Items 1 and 3 of the present Article, 
the servitude may also be established in the interest and upon the claim of the person, to whom the land 
plot has been granted by the right of the inherited life possession or by the right of the permanent use. 
5. The owner of the land plot, burdened with the servitude, shall have the right, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the law, to claim from the persons, in whose interest the servitude has been established, a 
proportionate payment for the use of the land plot. 
See also Land Code of the Russian Federation No. 136-FZ of October 25, 2001  
Article 275. Preservation of the Servitude in the Transfer of the Rights to the 
Land Plot 
1. The servitude shall be preserved in the case of the transfer of the land plot, burdened with this 
servitude, to the other person. 
2. The servitude shall not be an independent object of the purchase and sale or of the mortgage, and 
shall not be transferred in any way to the persons, who are not the owners of the immovable property, to 
provide for the use of which the servitude has been established. 
Article 276. Termination of the Servitude 
1. Upon the claim of the owner of the land plot, burdened with the servitude, the servitude may be 
terminated in view of the disappearance of the grounds, on account of which it has been instituted. 
2. In the cases, when the land plot, owned by the citizen or by the legal entity, cannot be used in 
conformity with its intended purpose as a result of its being burdened with the servitude, the owner shall 
have the right to claim through the court that the servitude be terminated. 
Article 277. The Burdening with the Servitude of the Buildings and the 
Structures 
As applied to the rules, stipulated by Articles 274-276 of the present Code, with the servitude may 
also be burdened the buildings, the structures and the other immovable property, whose limited use is 
necessary, regardless of the use of the land plot. 
Article 278. The Turning of the Penalty onto the Land Plot 
The turning of the penalty onto the land plot by the obligations of its owner shall be admitted only 
on the grounds of the court decision. 
Article 279. Redemption of the Land Plot for the State and for the Municipal 
Needs 
1. The land plot may be withdrawn from the owner for the state or for the municipal needs by way 
of redemption. 
Depending on for whose needs the land plot is being withdrawn, the redemption shall be effected by 
the Russian Federation, by the corresponding subject of the Russian Federation, or by the municipal 
entity. 
2. The decision on the withdrawal of the land plot for the state or for the municipal needs shall be 
adopted by the federal executive power bodies and by the executive power bodies of the subjects of the 
Russian Federation. 
The state bodies, authorized to take decisions on the withdrawal of land plots for the state or for the 
municipal needs, and the order of the preparation and the adoption of these decisions shall be defined by 
the federal land legislation. 
3. The owner of the land plot shall be notified in written form about the forthcoming withdrawal of 
the land plot not later than one year in advance by the body, which has passed the decision on the 
withdrawal. The redemption of the land plot before the expiry of one year from the date of the owner's 
receipt of the notification shall be effected only upon his consent. 
4. The decision of the state body on the withdrawal of the land plot for the state or for the municipal 
needs shall be subject to the state registration with the body, engaged in the registration of the rights to 
the land plot. The owner of the land plot shall be notified about the registration having been effected with 
the indication of its date. 
5. The redemption for the state or for the municipal needs of a part of the land plot shall be admitted 
only with the consent of the owner. 
Article 280. The Rights of the Owner of the Land Plot, Subject to Withdrawal 
for the State or for the Municipal Needs 
The owner of the land plot, subject to the withdrawal for the state or for the municipal needs, shall 
have the right to possess, use and dispose of the plot at his own discretion, and also to make the necessary 
outlays, providing for the use of the land plot in conformity with its stipulated purpose, over the period of 
time from the moment of the registration of the decision on the withdrawal of the land plot and up to the 
moment of reaching an agreement, or of the court passing the decision on the redemption of the land plot. 
However, the owner shall take the risk that the outlays and the losses he has borne in connection with the 
new construction, with the extension and the reconstruction of the buildings and the structures on the land 
plot during the said period may be turned against himself when defining the redemption price of the land 
plot (Article 281). 
Article 281. Redemption Price of the Land Plot, Withdrawn for the State or for 
the Municipal Needs 
1. The payment for the land plot. being withdrawn for the state or for the municipal needs (the 
redemption price), the term and the other conditions of the redemption shall be defined by an agreement 
with the owner of the land plot. The agreement shall incorporate an obligation of the Russian Federation, 
of the subject of the Russian Federation or of the municipal entity to pay the redemption price for the 
withdrawn land plot. 
2. While defining the redemption price, incorporated into it shall be the market cost of the land plot 
and of the immovable property, situated on it, as well as all the losses, inflicted upon the owner by the 
withdrawal of the land plot, including the losses, borne by him in connection with an advanced 
termination of his obligations to the third persons, including the missed profit. 
3. By an agreement with the owner, he may be allotted, instead of the land plot, withdrawn for the 
state of for the municipal needs, another land plot, with the offsetting of its cost against the redemption 
price. 
Article 282. Redemption of the Land Plot for the State and Municipal Needs by 
the Court Decision 
If the owner does not agree with the decision on the withdrawal from him of his land plot for the 
state or for the municipal needs, or if no agreement has been reached with him on the redemption price or 
on the other terms of the redemption, the state body, which has adopted the said decision, shall have the 
right to file a claim for the redemption of the land plot with the court. The claim for the redemption of the 
land plot for the state or for the municipal needs may be presented within two years from the moment of 
forwarding the notification, indicated in Item 3, Article 279 of the present Code, to the owner of the land 
plot. 
Article 283. Cessation of the Rights of the Possession or the Use of the Land 
Plot When It Is Withdrawn for the State or Municipal Needs 
In the cases, when the land plot, being withdrawn for the state or for the municipal needs, is in the 
ownership and in the use by the right of the inherited life possession or of the permanent use, the 
cessation of these rights shall be effected in accordance with the rules, stipulated by Articles 279-282 of 
the present Code. 
Article 284. Withdrawal of the Land Plot, Which Is Not Used in Conformity 
with Its Purpose 
The land plot may be withdrawn from the owner in the cases, when it is purposed for agricultural 
production or for the housing or the other kind of construction, but is not used for the corresponding 
purpose in the course of three years, unless a longer term has been stipulated by the law. Within this 
period shall not be included the time, which is necessary for the development of the land plot, as well as 
the time, during which the land plot could not have been put to its purported use because of the natural 
calamities or of the other circumstances, precluding such use. 
Article 285. Withdrawal of the Land Plot, Used with the Violation of the 
Legislation 
The land plot may be withdrawn from the owner, if the use of the land plot proceeds with a crude 
violation of the rules for the rational use of the land, laid down by the land legislation, in particular, if the 
land plot is not used in conformity with its intended purpose, or if its use causes an essential fall in the 
fertility of the farming lands or seriously deteriorates the ecological situation. 
Article 286. The Order of Redemption of the Land Plot in View of Its Improper 
Use 
1. The state power body or the local self-government body, authorized to adopt decisions on the 
withdrawal of land plots on the grounds, stipulated by Articles 284 and 285 of the present Code, as well 
as the procedure for an obligatory advance warning of the land plot owners on the violations, committed 
by them, shall be defined by the law. 
2. If the owner of the land plot notifies in written form the body, which has adopted the decision on 
the withdrawal of the land plot, about his consent to execute this decision, the land plot shall be subject to 
the sale at an open auction. 
3. If the owner of the land plot does not agree with the decision on the withdrawal of the land plot 
from him, the body, which has passed the decision on the withdrawal of the land plot, may file the claim 
for the sale of the land plot with the court. 
Article 287. Termination of the Rights to the Land Plot, Belonging to the 
Persons, Who Are Not Its Owners 
The termination of the rights to the land plot, belonging to the lease-holders and to the other 
persons, who are not its owners, for the reason of an improper use of the land plot by these persons, shall 
be effected on the grounds and in conformity with the order, established by the land legislation. 
Chapter 18. The Right of Ownership and the Other Rights of Estate to the Living Quarters 
On the Right of Ownership and Other Rights in Rem in Dwelling Premises, see the Housing Code of 
the Russian Federation No. 188-FZ of December 29, 2004  
Article 288. The Ownership of the Living Quarters 
1. The owner shall exercise his rights of the possession, the use and the disposal of the living 
quarters in his ownership in conformity with their intended purpose. 
2. The living quarters shall be intended for the citizens' residence. 
The citizen-the owner of the living quarters may use them for his own residence and for the 
residence of the members of his family. 
The living quarters may be given by their owner in rent for residence on the ground of a contract. 
3. The accommodation in the dwelling houses of various kinds of industrial production shall not be 
admitted. 
The accommodation by the owner in the living quarters he owns of the enterprises, institutions and 
organizations shall be admitted only after the said quarters have been turned from the living into the non
living ones. The transfer of the quarters from the living into the non-living ones shall be effected in 
conformity with the procedure, defined by the housing legislation. 
Article 289. The Flat as an Object of the Right of Ownership 
To the owner of the flat in an apartment house, alongside the quarters he owns, occupied by his flat, 
shall also belong a share in the right of the ownership to the common property of the house (Article 290). 
Article 290. The Common Property of the Owners of Flats in an Apartment 
House 
1. The owners of flats in an apartment house shall own by the right of the common share ownership 
the common quarters of the house, the house's load-carrying structures, the mechanical and electrical 
equipment, the plumbing fixtures and the other equipment outside or within the flat, servicing more than 
one flat. 
2. The owner of the flat shall not have the right to alienate his share in the right of the ownership to 
the common property of the apartment house, or to perform other actions, entailing the transfer of this 
share apart from the right of the ownership to the flat. 
Article 291. The Partnership of the Housing Owners 
1. To provide for the exploitation of the apartment house, the use of the flats and of their common 
property, the owners of flats shall set up the partnerships of the owners of flats (of the housing). 
2. The partnership of the owners of flats shall be the non-profit organization, set up and operating in 
conformity with the Law on the Partnerships of the Owners of Flats. 
See Federal Law No. 72-FZ of June 15, 1996 on the Partnerships of Living Space Owners  
Federal Law No. 213-FZ of December 30, 2004 amended Article 292 of this Code. The amendments 
shall come into force as of January 1, 2005 
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 292. The Rights of the Family Members of the Owners of the Living 
Quarters 
1. The family members of the owner, residing in the living quarters he owns, shall have the right to 
use these quarters on the terms, stipulated by the housing legislation. 
Members with dispositive capacity of the family of an owner living in housing premises belonging 
to the owner shall bear joint and several liability with the owner for the obligations arising from the use of 
the housing premises. 
2. The transfer of the right of the ownership to the dwelling house or to the flat to the other person 
shall be the ground for the cessation of the right of the use of the living quarters by the family members of 
the former owner, unless otherwise established by law; 
3. The family members of the owner of the living quarters may claim the elimination of the 
violations of their rights to the living quarters on the part of any persons, including on the part of the 
owner of the living quarters. 
4. Alienation of a dwelling in which there live members of the family of the owner of the dwelling 
who are under guardianship or curatorship or minor members of the family of the owner who are left 
without parental care (of which the body of guardianship and curatorship is aware), if it affects the rights 
or legally protected interests of the indicated persons, shall be permitted with the consent of the body of 
guardianship and curatorship. 
Article 293. Cessation of the Right of the Ownership to the Mismanaged Living 
Quarters 
If the owner of the living quarters uses them other than for their intended purpose, systematically 
violates the rights and interests of the neighbors or mismanages the housing by allowing its destruction, 
the local self-government body shall warn the owner about the need to eliminate the said violations, and if 
these violations entail the destruction of the living quarters - it shall also fix an approximate term for the 
owner to perform the repairs of the quarters. 
If the owner after the warning continues to violate the rights and interests of the neighbors or to use 
the living quarters for other than their intended purpose, or does not perform the necessary repairs without 
serious grounds, the court, upon the claim of the local self-government body, shall have the right to adopt 
the decision on the sale of such living quarters at an open auction with the subsequent payment to the 
owner of the means, derived from the sale, minus the expenses, involved in the execution of the court 
decision. 
Chapter 19. The Right of Economic Management and the Right of Operation Management 
Article 294. The Right of Economic Management 
The state or the municipal unitary enterprise, which owns the property by the right of economic 
management, shall possess, use and dispose of this property within the limits, defined in conformity with 
the present Code. 
Article 295. The Rights of the Owner with Respect to the Property in Economic 
Management 
1. The owner of the property in economic management, in conformity with the law, shall resolve the 
issues, involved in the setting up of the enterprise, in defining the object and the goals of its activity, in its 
reorganization and liquidation; he shall appoint the director (the head) of the enterprise and shall exert 
control over the use in conformity with the stipulated purpose and over the maintenance of the property, 
assigned to it. 
The owner shall have the right to obtain a part of the profit, derived from the use of the property in 
the economic management of the enterprise. 
2. The enterprise shall not have the right to sell the immovable property, belonging to it by the right 
of economic management, to give it in rent, to mortgage it, to contribute it as an investment into the 
authorized (joint) capital of the economic companies and the partnerships, or to dispose of it in any other 
way without the consent of the owner. 
See Procedure for Giving Consent to the Sale of the Immovable Property, Allocated to the Federal 
State Unitary Enterprise on the Right of Economic Management approved by Order of the Ministry of 
the State Property of the Russian Federation No. 241-r of February 15, 1999  
The enterprise shall dispose of the rest of the property, belonging to it, independently, with the 
exception of the cases, established by the law or by the other legal acts. 
Article 296. The Right of Operation Management 
1. The state enterprises, as well as the institutions, shall exert with respect to the property, assigned 
to them, within the range, established by the law, and in conformity with the goals of their activity, the 
orders of the owner and the purpose of the property, the rights of its possession, use and disposal. 
2. The owner of the property, assigned to the state enterprise or institution, shall have the right to 
withdraw the property, which is superfluous, unused or used other than for the stipulated purpose, and to 
dispose of it at his own discretion. 
Article 297. Disposal of the Property of the State Enterprise 
1. The state enterprise shall have the right to alienate or to dispose in another way of the property, 
assigned to it, only with the consent of the owner of this property. 
The state enterprise shall independently realize the products it manufactures, unless otherwise 
established by the law or by the other legal acts. 
2. The order for the distribution of the incomes of the state enterprise shall be defined by the owner 
of its property. 
Article 298. Disposal of the Property of the Institution 
1. The institution shall not have the right to alienate or to dispose in any other way of the property, 
assigned to it, and also of the property it has acquired at the expense of the means, allocated to it by an 
estimate. 
2. If, in conformity with the constituent documents, the institution has been granted the right to 
engage in a profitable activity, the incomes, derived from such an activity, and the property, acquired at 
the expense of these incomes, shall be independently disposed of by the institution and shall be registered 
on a separate balance. 
Article 299. The Acquisition and the Termination of the Right of Economic 
Management and of the Right of Operation Management 
1. The right of economic management or the right of operation management of the property, with 
respect to which the owner has adopted the decision to assign it to a unitary enterprise or to an institution, 
shall arise with the given enterprise or institution from the moment of the transfer of this property, unless 
otherwise established by the law and by the other legal acts, or by the owner's decision. 
2. The fruits, products and incomes from the use of the property in the economic or in the operation 
management, as well as the property, which the unitary enterprise or the institution has acquired by a 
contract or on the other grounds, shall pass into the economic or into the operation management of the 
enterprise or of the institution in conformity with the order, established by the present Code, by the other 
laws and the other legal acts for the acquisition of the right of ownership. 
3. The right of economic management and the right of operation management shall be terminated on 
the grounds and in conformity with the order, stipulated by the present Code, by the other laws and the 
other legal acts for the termination of the right of ownership, and also in the case of the lawful withdrawal 
of the property from the enterprise or from the institution by the owner's decision. 
Article 300. Preservation of the Rights to the Property When the Enterprise or 
the Institution Is Transferred to Another Owner 
1. When the right of the ownership to the state or to the municipal enterprise as a property complex 
is transferred to another owner of the state or of the municipal property, such an enterprise shall preserve 
the right of economic management to the property, belonging to it. 
2. When the right of the ownership to the institution is transferred to another person, this institution 
shall preserve the right of operation management with respect to the property, belonging to it. 
Chapter 20. Protection of the Right of Ownership and of the Other Rights of Estate 
Article 301. Reclamation of the Property from the Other Person's Adverse 
Possession 
The owner shall have the right to reclaim his property from the other person's adverse possession. 
Article 302. Reclamation of the Property from the Bona Fide Acquirer 
1. If the property has been purchased for a price from the person, who had no right to alienate it, of 
which the acquirer has been unaware and could not have been aware (the bona fide acquirer, or the 
acquirer in good faith), the owner shall have the right to reclaim this property from the acquirer, if the 
said property was lost by the owner or by the person, to whom the owner has passed the property into 
possession, or if it was stolen from the one or from the other, or if it has gone out of their possession in 
another way contrary to their will. 
2. If the property has been acquired gratuitously from the person, who had no right to alienate it, the 
owner shall have the right to reclaim the property in any case. 
3. The money, and also the securities to bearer shall not be reclaimed from the bona fide acquirer. 
Article 303. Settlements in the Reclamation of the Property from the Adverse 
Possession 
In reclaiming the property from the other person's adverse possession, the owner shall also have the 
right to claim from the person, who has known, or should have known, that his possession is adverse (the 
possessor in bad faith), the return or the compensation of all the incomes, which he has derived, or should 
have derived, over the entire period of the possession; and from the bona fide possessor - the return or the 
compensation of all the incomes, which he has derived, or should have derived from the moment, when 
he has learned, or should have learned, about the adversity of the possession or when he has received the 
summons by the owner's claim for the return of the property. 
The possessor, both in good and in bad faith, shall in his turn have the right to claim that the owner 
recompense the necessary outlays for the property he has made over that period of time, for which the 
incomes from the property are due to the owner. 
The bona fide possessor shall have the right to retain the improvements he has made in his own 
possession, if they can be set apart without damaging the property. If such separation of the 
improvements is impossible, the bona fide possessor shall have the right to claim the compensation of the 
outlays for the improvements he has made, but not in excess of the amount of the increment in the 
property's cost. 
Article 304. Protection of the Owner's Rights from the Violations, Not Involved 
in the Deprivation of the Possession 
The owner shall have the right to claim that all violations of his right be eliminated, even though 
these violations have not entailed the deprivation of the possession. 
Article 305. Protection of the Rights of the Possessor, Who Is Not the Owner 
The rights, stipulated by Articles 301-304 of the present Code, shall also belong to the person, who, 
even though he is not the owner but possesses the property by the right of the inherited life possession, of 
the economic management, of the operation management or on the other grounds, stipulated by the law or 
by the contract. This person shall have the right to the protection of his possession also against the owner. 
Article 306. The Consequences of the Termination of the Right of Ownership 
by Force of the Law 
If the Russian Federation passes the law, terminating the right of ownership, the losses, inflicted 
upon the owner as a result of the adoption of this act, including the cost of the property, shall be 
recompensed by the state. The disputes on the compensation for the losses shall be resolved by the court. 
Section III. The General Part of the Law of Obligation 
Subsection 1. The General Provisions on Obligations 
Chapter 21. The Concept and the Aspects of an Obligation 
See Federal Law No. 177-FZ of December 23, 2003 on Insuring Natural Persons' Deposits Made with 
Banks of the Russian Federation  
Article 307. The Concept of an Obligation and the Grounds for It to Arise 
1. By force of an obligation, one person (the debtor) shall be obliged to perform in favour of another 
person (the creditor) a certain action, such as: to transfer the property, to perform a job, to pay the money, 
etc., or to abstain from a certain action, while the creditor shall have the right to claim that the debtor 
discharge his obligation. 
2. Obligations shall arise from an agreement, from the infliction of a damage, or on the other 
grounds, indicated in the present Code. 
Article 308. The Parties to an Obligation 
1. One or several persons simultaneously may take part in the obligation in the capacity of each of 
its parties. 
The invalidity of the creditor's claims against one of the persons, participating in the obligation on 
the side of the debtor, the same as the expiry of the term of the limitation of actions by the claim against 
such a person, shall not of themselves have a bearing on his claims against the rest of these persons. 
2. If each of the parties by the contract shall bear a duty in favour of the other party, it shall be 
regarded as the debtor of the other party by what it is obliged to do in its favour, and simultaneously as its 
creditor by what it has the right to claim from it. 
3. The obligation shall not create the duties for the persons, who do not participate in it in the 
capacity of the parties (for the third persons). 
In the cases, stipulated by the law, by the other legal acts or by an agreement between the parties, 
the obligation may create for the third persons the rights with respect to one or to both parties of the 
obligation. 
Chapter 22. The Discharge of Obligations 
Article 309. The General Provisions 
Obligations shall be discharged in the proper way in conformity with the terms of the obligation and 
with the requirements of the law and of the other legal acts, and in the absence of such terms and 
requirements - in conformity with the customs of the business turnover or with the other habitually 
presented demands. 
Article 310. Inadmissibly of the Unilateral Refusal to Discharge the Obligation 
The unilateral refusal to discharge the obligation and the unilateral amendment of its terms shall not 
be admitted, with the exception of the law-stipulated cases. The unilateral refusal to discharge the 
obligation, connected with its parties' performing the business activity, and the unilateral amendment of 
the terms of such an obligation shall also be admissible in the cases, stipulated by the contract, unless 
otherwise following from the law or from the substance of the obligation. 
Article 311. Discharge of the Obligation by Parts 
The creditor shall have the right to accept the discharge of the obligation by parts, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the law, by the other legal acts and by the terms of the obligation, and does not follow from 
the customs of the business turnover or from the substance of the obligation. 
Article 312. Discharge of the Obligation to the Proper Person 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement between the parties and follows from the customs of 
the business turnover, or from the substance of the obligation, the debtor shall have the right, while 
discharging the obligation, to demand proofs of the fact that the discharge is accepted by the creditor 
himself or by the person he has authorized for this purpose, and shall take the risk of the consequences of 
his failure to present such a demand. 
Article 313. Discharge of the Obligation by the Third Person 
1. The discharge of the obligation may be imposed by the debtor upon the third person, unless the 
debtor's duty to discharge the obligation in person follows from the law, from the other legal acts, from 
the terms of the obligation or from its substance. In this case the creditor shall be obliged to accept the 
discharge, offered by the third person instead of by the debtor. 
2. The third person, undergoing the threat of losing his right to the property of the debtor (the right 
of the lease, of the mortgage, etc.) as a result of the creditor's turning the penalty onto this property, may 
at his own expense satisfy the creditor's claim without obtaining the debtor's consent. In this case, the 
rights of the creditor by the obligation shall pass to the third person in conformity with Articles 382-387 
of the present Code. 
Article 314. The Term of the Discharge of the Obligation 
Decree of the President of the Russian Federation No. 2204 of December 20, 1994 established that the 
maximum term of fulfillment of the obligations of payment for the goods delivered under the contracts 
(performed works or rendered services) shall be equal to three months from the time of the actual 
receipt of goods (performance of works or rendering of services) 
1. If the obligation stipulates, or allows to stipulate the day of its discharge or the period of time, 
within which it shall be discharged, the obligation shall be subject to discharge on this particular day or, 
correspondingly, at any moment within this period. 
2. In the cases, when the obligation does not stipulate the deadline for its discharge and does not 
contain the terms, making it possible to define this deadline, it shall be discharged within a reasonable 
term after the inception of the obligation. 
The obligation, which has not been discharged within a reasonable term, the same as the obligation, 
the term of whose discharge has been defined by the moment of demand, shall be discharged by the 
debtor within seven days from the day of the creditor's presenting the claim for its discharge, unless the 
duty of the discharge within a different term follows from the law, from the other legal acts, from the 
provisions of the obligation, from the customs of the business turnover, or from the substance of the 
obligation. 
Article 315. Advanced Discharge of the Obligation 
The debtor shall have the right to discharge the obligation in advance of the deadline, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the law, by the other legal acts or by the terms of the obligation or follows from 
its substance. However, an advanced discharge of the obligations, involved in the performance by its 
parties of the business activity, shall be admitted only in the cases, when the possibility to discharge the 
obligation before the fixed date has been stipulated by the law, by the other legal acts or by the terms of 
the obligation, or follows from the customs of the business turnover or from the substance of the 
obligation. 
Article 316. The Place of Discharge of the Obligation 
Unless the place of the discharge has been defined by the law, by the other legal acts or by the 
agreement or follows from the customs of the business turnover or from the substance of the obligation, 
the discharge shall be effected: - by the obligation to transfer the land plot, the building, the structure or the other immovable 
property - at the place of location of the property; - by the obligation to transfer the commodity or the other property, envisaging its shipment - at the 
place of the ceding the property to the first shipper for its being forwarded to the creditor; - by the other obligations of the businessman to transfer the commodity or the other property - at the 
place of the manufacture or of the storage of the property, if this place has been known to the creditor at 
the moment of the inception of the obligation; - by the pecuniary obligation - at the place of residence of the creditor at the moment of the 
inception of the obligation, and if the creditor is a legal entity - at the place of its location at the moment 
of the inception of the obligation; if the creditor by the moment of the discharge of the obligation has 
changed the place of his residence or the place of his stay and has informed about this the debtor - at the 
new place of the creditor's residence or stay, with referring the expenses, involved in the change of the 
place of discharge, onto the creditor's account; - by all the other obligations - at the place of residence of the debtor, and in case the debtor is a legal 
entity - at the place of its location. 
On the application by arbitration courts of Article 317 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation see 
Informational Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 70 
of November 4, 2002  
Article 317. The Currency of the Pecuniary Obligations 
1. The pecuniary obligations shall be expressed in roubles (Article 140). 
2. In the pecuniary obligation it may be stipulated that it shall be liable to the payment in roubles in 
the amount, equivalent to the definite amount in the foreign currency, or in the agreed monetary units 
(ECU, the "special borrowing rights", etc.). In this case, the amount liable to the payment in roubles shall 
be defined in conformity with the official exchange rate of the corresponding currency or of the 
conventional monetary units by the day of the payment, unless the other exchange rate or the other day of 
its formulation has been established by the law or by the parties' agreement. 
3. The use of the foreign currency and also of the payment documents in the foreign currency on the 
territory of the Russian Federation by obligations shall only be admitted in the cases, in the order and on 
the terms, defined by the law or established in conformity with the procedure, laid down by it. 
Federal Law No. 152-FZ of November 26, 2002 amended Article 3 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 318. The Increase of the Amounts, Paid Out for the Maintenance of the 
Citizen 
The amount, paid out by the direct pecuniary obligation for the maintenance of the citizen: to 
recompense for the harm, inflicted to the life or to the health, by the contract for a life maintenance, and 
in the other cases - shall be indexed taking into account the level of the inflation in the procedure and 
cases stipulated by law. 
Article 319. Priority for Satisfaction of Claims under the Monetary Obligation 
The amount of the effected payment, insufficient for the discharge of the pecuniary obligation in 
full, in the absence of another agreement, shall first of all cover the creditor's expenses, involved in the 
enforcement of the discharge, then - the interest, and in the remaining part - the basic amount of the debt. 
Article 320. Discharge of the Alternative Obligation 
The debtor, who is obliged to transfer to the creditor this or that property, or to perform one of the 
two or of several actions, shall have the right of choice, unless otherwise following from the law, from the 
other legal acts or from the terms of the obligation. 
Article 321. Discharge of the Obligation, in Which Several Creditors or Several 
Debtors Participate 
If several creditors or several debtors take part in the obligation, each of the creditors shall have the 
right to claim the discharge, and each of the debtors shall be obliged to discharge the obligation in an 
equal share with the others, unless otherwise following from the law, from the other legal acts, or from 
the terms of the obligation. 
Article 322. Joint Obligations 
1. The joint duty (the liability), or the joint claim shall arise, if the joint nature of the duty or of the 
claim has been stipulated by the contract or has been established by the law, in particular, in the case of 
the indivisibility of the object of the obligation. 
2. The duties of several debtors by the obligation, involved in the business activity, the same as the 
claims of several creditors in such an obligation, shall be joint ones, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
law, by the other legal acts, or by the terms of the obligation. 
Article 323. The Creditor's Rights in the Joint Duty 
1. In case of the debtors' joint duty, the creditor shall have the right to claim the discharge both from 
all the debtors jointly, and also from any one of them taken apart, and both in full and in the part of the 
debt. 
2. The creditor, who has not been fully satisfied by one of the joint debtors, shall have the right to 
claim the rest from the joint debtors. 
The joint debtors shall stay obligated until the moment, when the obligation has been discharged in 
full. 
Article 324. Objections to the Creditor's Claims in the Joint Duty 
In the case of the joint duty, the debtor shall not have the right to put forward against the creditor's 
claims the objections, which are based on such relations of the other debtors with the creditor, in which 
the said debtor does not participate. 
Article 325. Discharge of the Joint Duty by One of the Debtors 
1. The discharge of the joint duty in full by one of the debtors shall absolve the rest of the debtors 
from the discharge toward the creditor. 
2. Unless otherwise following from the relations between the joint debtors: 
1) the debtor, who has discharged the joint duty, shall have the right of the claim of regress to the 
rest of the debtors in equal shares, less his own share; 
2) that which has not been paid by one of the joint debtors to the debtor, who has discharged the 
joint duty, shall fall in equal shares on this debtor and on the rest of the debtors. 
3. The rules of the present Article shall be applied correspondingly to the termination of the joint 
obligation by offsetting the claim of regress, filed by one of the debtors. 
Article 326. The Joint Claims 
1. In the case of the joint claims, any of the joint creditors shall have the right to present to the 
debtor the claim in the full volume. 
Before the claim has been presented by one of the joint creditors, the debtor shall have the right to 
discharge the obligation toward any one of them at his own discretion. 
2. The debtor shall not have the right to put forward the objections against the claim of one of the 
creditors, that are based on such relations of the debtor with the other joint creditor, in which the given 
creditor does not take part. 
3. The discharge of the obligations in full toward one of the creditors shall absolve the debtor from 
the discharge toward the other creditors. 
4. The joint creditor, who has accepted the discharge from the debtor, shall be obliged to 
recompense what is due to the other creditors in equal shares, unless otherwise following from the 
relationships between them. 
Article 327. Discharge of the Obligation by Placing the Debt on a Deposit 
1. The debtor shall have the right to place the money or the securities he owes on the notary's 
deposit, and in the law-established cases - on the court's deposit, if the obligation cannot be discharged by 
the debtor on account of: 
1) the absence of the creditor or of the person, whom he has authorized to accept the discharge of 
the obligation, at the place, where the obligation shall be discharged; 
2) the creditor's legal incapacity and his having no substitute; 
3) an obvious absence of any certainty about who is the creditor by the obligation, in particular, in 
connection with the dispute on this issue arising between the creditor and the other persons; 
4) the creditor's avoidance of accepting the discharge of the obligation or any other delay on his 
part. 
2. The placing of the sum of money or of the securities on the notary's or on the court's deposit shall 
be regarded as the discharge of the obligation. 
The notary or the court, on whose deposit the money or the securities have been placed, shall notify 
about this the creditor. 
Article 328. The Recourse Discharge of Obligations 
1. The recourse discharge shall be recognized as the discharge of the obligation by one of the 
parties, which in conformity with the agreement has been stipulated by the discharge of its obligations by 
the other party. 
2. In case of the obliged party's failure to discharge the obligations, stipulated by the agreement, or 
of the existence of the circumstances, obviously testifying to the fact that such discharge will not be 
effected within the fixed term, the party, onto which the recourse discharge has been imposed, shall have 
the right to suspend the discharge of its obligation or to refuse to discharge this obligation, and to claim 
the compensation of the losses. 
If the obligation, stipulated by the agreement, has not been discharged in the full volume, the party, 
onto which the recourse discharge has been imposed, shall have the right to suspend the discharge of its 
obligation or to refuse to discharge it in the part, corresponding to the above-said underdischarge. 
3. If the recourse discharge of the obligation has been effected, despite the fact that the other party 
has not discharged its obligation, stipulated by the agreement, this party shall be obliged to effect such 
discharge. 
4. The rules, stipulated by Items 2 and 3 of the present Article, shall be applied, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the law. 
Chapter 23. Providing for the Discharge of Obligations 
_ 1. The General Provisions 
Article 329. The Ways of Providing for the Discharge of Obligations 
1. The discharge of obligations may be provided for by the forfeit, the pledge, the retention of the 
debtor's property, the surety, the bank guarantee, the advance and also in the other ways, stipulated by the 
law or by the agreement. 
2. The invalidity of the agreement on providing for the discharge of the obligation shall not entail 
the invalidity of this obligation (the principal obligation). 
3. The invalidity of the principal obligation shall entail the invalidity of the obligation, providing for 
it, unless otherwise established by the law. 
_ 2. The Forfeit 
Article 330. The Concept of the Forfeit 
1. The forfeit (the fine, the penalty) shall be recognized as the sum of money, defined by the law or 
by the agreement, which the debtor is obliged to pay to the creditor in case of his non-discharge, or an 
improper discharge, of the obligation, in particular, in the case of the delay of the discharge. By the claim 
for the payment of the forfeit, the creditor shall not be obliged to prove that the losses have actually been 
inflicted upon him. 
2. The creditor shall not have the right to claim the payment of the forfeit, if the debtor is not 
responsible for the non-discharge or an improper discharge of the obligation. 
Article 331. The Form of the Agreement on the Forfeit 
The agreement on the forfeit shall be made out in written form, irrespective of the form of the 
principal obligation. 
The non-observance of the written form shall entail the invalidity of the agreement on the forfeit. 
Article 332. The Legal Forfeit 
1. The creditor shall have the right to claim the payment of the forfeit, defined by the law (the legal 
forfeit), irrespective of whether the obligation for its payment has been stipulated by the agreement 
between the parties. 
2. The amount of the legal forfeit may be increased by the agreement between the parties, unless it 
is prohibited by the law. 
Article 333. The Reduction of the Forfeit 
If the forfeit, liable to the payment, is obviously out of proportion compared with the consequences 
of the violation of the obligation, the court shall have the right to reduce the forfeit. 
The rules of the present Article shall not infringe upon the debtor's right to the reduction of the 
volume of his liability on the ground of Article 404 of the present Code and upon the creditor's right to 
the compensation of the losses in the cases, stipulated by Article 394 of the present Code. 
_ 3. The Pledge 
See the review of the practice of considering disputes connected with the application of the rules of the 
Civil Code of the Russian Federation on a pledge (appendix to the Informational Letter of the Higher 
Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 26 of January 15, 1998)  
Article 334. The Concept and the Grounds for the Pledge to Arise 
1. By force of the law, the creditor by the obligation, guaranteed against by the pledge (the pledgee), 
shall have the right of priority before the other creditors of the person, to whom this property belongs (the 
pledger), in the case of the debtor's non-discharge of this obligation, to be satisfied from the cost of the 
pledged property after the deductions, established by the law. 
According to the Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999 
claims secured by maritime mortgage shall be subject to prior satisfaction to the claims following from 
the liabilities secured by the registered mortgage on the ship  
The pledgee shall have the right to receive, on the same principle, satisfaction from the insurance 
compensation for the loss or for the damage of the pledged property, regardless of the fact, in whose 
favour it has been insured, unless the loss or the damage has taken place for the reasons, for which the 
pledgee shall be answerable. 
2. The pledge of the land plots, the enterprises, the buildings, the structures, the flats and of the other 
immovable property (the mortgage) shall be regulated by the Law on the Mortgage. The general rules on 
the pledge, contained in the present Code, shall be applied to the mortgage in the cases, for which no 
other rules have been laid down by the present Code or by the Law on the Mortgage. 
3. The pledge shall arise by force of an agreement. It shall also arise on the ground of the law in the 
case, when the circumstances, indicated in it, occur, if the law has stipulated, what kind of the property 
and for securing against the discharge of what kind of obligation shall be recognized as that in pledge. 
The rules of the present Code on the pledge, arising by force of an agreement, shall be 
correspondingly applied to the pledge, arising on the ground of the law, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
law. 
On the pledge of agricultural products, raw materials and foodstuffs see Federal Law No. 100-FZ of 
July 14, 1997  
Article 335. The Pledger 
1. Both the debtor himself and the third person may come out in the capacity of the pledger. 
2. The pledger of the thing may be its owner or the person, having with respect to it the right of 
economic management. 
The person, to whom the thing belongs by the right of economic management, shall have the right to 
pawn it without the consent of the owner in the cases, stipulated by Item 2 of Article 295 of the present 
Code. 
3. The pledger of the right may be the person, to whom the pledged right belongs. 
The pledge of the right of lease or of the other right to the other person's thing shall not be admitted 
without the consent of its owner or of the person, to whom the right of its economic management belongs, 
if by the law or by the agreement the alienation of this right without the consent of the said persons has 
been prohibited. 
Article 336. The Object of Pledge 
1. The object of pledge shall be any property, including the things and the property rights (the 
claims), with the exception of the property, withdrawn from the circulation, of the claims, inseparably 
linked with the creditor's personality, in particular, the claims for the alimony, for the compensation for 
the harm, inflicted to the life or to the health, and of the other rights, whose ceding to the other persons is 
prohibited by the law. 
See Review of the Practice of Consideration by the Arbitration Courts of Disputes, Involved in the 
Application of the Norms for a Contract on Pledge and for the Other Provisional Deals with the 
Securities Informational given by Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the 
Russian Federation No. 67 of January 21, 2002  
2. The pledge of the individual kinds of property, in particular, of the property of the citizens, onto 
which no penalty shall be turned, may be prohibited or restricted by the law. 
Article 337. The Claim, Secured Against by the Pledge 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement, the pledge shall secure the claim in the volume, 
which it possesses by the moment of its satisfaction, in particular, the interest, the forfeit, the 
compensation of the losses, caused by the delay in the discharge, and also the compensation of the 
necessary outlays, made by the pledgee for keeping the pledged thing, as well as the expenses, involved 
in the exaction. 
Article 338. The Pledge Without and With the Transfer of the Pledged Property 
to the Pledgee 
1. The pledged property shall remain in the custody of the pledger, unless otherwise stipulated by 
the agreement. 
The property, on which the mortgage has been imposed, and also the pawned commodities, which 
are in circulation, shall not be transferred to the pledgee. 
2. The object of pledge may be left with the pledger under the lock and seal of the pledgee. 
The object of pledge may be left with the pledger with putting upon it the signs, testifying to the 
pledge (the firm pledge). 
3. The object of pledge, transferred by the pledger into a temporary possession or use to the third 
person, shall be regarded as left with the pledger. 
4. In the pledge of the property right, certified by the security, the latter shall be transferred to the 
pledgee or given into the notary's deposit, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement. 
Article 339. The Contract on the Pledge, Its Form and Registration 
1. Indicated in the contract on the pledge shall be the object of pledge and its estimate, substance 
and amount, and the term of discharging the obligation, secured against by the pledge. It shall also 
contain the indication, in the custody of which party the pledged property is. 
On Evaluation Activity in the Russian Federation see Federal Law No. 135-FZ of July 29, 1998  
Federal Law No. 213-FZ of December 30, 2004 amended Item 2 of Article 339 of this Code. The 
amendments shall come into force as of January 1, 2005 
See the previous text of the Item 
2. The agreement on the pledge shall be made out in written form. 
The agreement on the pledge of the movable property or of the rights to this property as the security 
against the obligations by the contract, which shall be notarially certified, shall be subject to the notary's 
certification. 
3. The agreement on the mortgage shall be registered in conformity with the procedure, laid down 
for the registration of the deals with the corresponding property. 
About state registration of mortgage see Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 
21, 1997  
4. The non-observance of the rules, contained in Items 2 and 3 of the present Article, shall entail the 
invalidity of the agreement on the pledge. 
Article 340. The Property, to Which the Pledgee's Rights Shall Be Extended 
1. The rights of the pledgee (the right of pledge) to the thing, which is the object of pledge, shall be 
extended to its accessories, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement. 
To the fruits, products and incomes, obtained as a result of the use of the pledged property, the right 
of pledge shall be extended in the law-stipulated cases. 
2. In the mortgage of an enterprise or of another property complex as a whole, the right of pledge 
shall be extended to all the property, included into its composition, both movable and immovable, 
including the right of claim and the exclusive rights, among them those that have been acquired during 
the period of the mortgage, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the agreement. 
3. The mortgage of a building or of a structure shall be admitted only with the simultaneous 
mortgage by the same contract of the land plot, on which this building or this structure stands, or of the 
part of this land plot, functionally providing for the mortgaged object, or of the right of the lease of this 
land plot or of the corresponding part thereof, belonging to the pledger. 
On peculiar features of mortgage of enterprises, buildings and constructions see Chapter XII of 
Federal Law No. 102-FZ of July 16, 1998  
Federal Law No. 213-FZ of December 30, 2004 amended Item 4 of Article 340 of this Code. The 
amendments shall come into force as of January 1, 2005 
See the previous text of the Item 
4. In the mortgage of the land plot, the right of mortgage shall be extended to the buildings and the 
structures, which have been, or are being constructed on the given land plot by the mortgager, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
In the presence of the relevant term in the contract, in case the penalty is turned onto the mortgaged 
land plot, the mortgager shall retain the right to a limited use (the servitude) of that part of the plot, which 
is necessary for the use of the building or of the structure in conformity with their intended purpose. The 
terms for the use of this part of the land plot shall be defined by the agreement, concluded between the 
mortgager and the mortgagee, and in case a dispute arises - by the court. 
5. If the mortgage has been established over the land plot, where the buildings or the structures are 
situated, which belong not to the mortgager, but to another person, in case the mortgagee turns the penalty 
onto this plot and it is sold at an open auction, the rights and duties, possessed with respect to this person 
by the mortgager, shall pass to the acquirer of the land plot. 
On peculiar features of mortgage of land plots see Chapter XI of Federal Law No. 102-FZ of July 16, 
1998  
6. The contract on the pledge, and with respect to the pledge, arising on the ground of the law - the 
law, may stipulate the pledge of the things and of the property rights, which the pledger will acquire in the 
future. 
Article 341. Arising of the Right of Pledge 
1. The right of pledge shall arise from the moment of concluding the contract of pledge, and with 
respect to the pledge of the property, subject to the transfer to the pledgee - from the moment of the 
transfer of this property, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of pledge. 
2. The right of pledge for the commodities in circulation shall arise in conformity with the rules of 
Item 2 of Article 357 of the present Code. 
Article 342. The Subsequent Pledge 
1. If the property in pledge becomes the object of yet another pledge as a security against other 
claims (the subsequent pledge), the claims of the subsequent pledgee shall be satisfied from the cost of 
this property after the claims of the previous pledgees. 
2. The subsequent pledge shall be admitted, unless it is prohibited by the previous contracts of 
pledge. 
3. The pledger shall be obliged to supply information on all the existing pledges of the given 
property, stipulated by Item 1 of Article 339 of the present Code, to every one of the subsequent pledgees, 
and shall be answerable for the losses, caused to the pledgees by his non-discharge of this obligation. 
Article 343. The Content and the Security of the Pledged Property 
1. The pledger or the pledgee, depending on in whose custody the pledged property is (Article 338), 
shall be obliged, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the contract: 
1) to insure at the expense of the pledger the pledged property in its full cost against the risks of the 
loss and damage, and if the full cost of the property exceeds the amount of the claim, secured against by 
the pledge - for the amount not less than that of the claim; 
2) to take measures, necessary to guarantee the security of the pledged property, including those 
involved in its protection against the encroachments and claims on the part of the third persons; 
3) to immediately notify the other party about the arising of a threat of the loss or the damage of the 
pledged property. 
2. The pledgee and the pledger shall both have the right to check by the documents and by the fact 
upon the existence, the quantity, the state and the storage conditions of the pledged property, which is in 
the custody of the other party. 
3. In case of a crude violation by the pledgee of the obligations, indicated in Item 1 of the present 
Article, which creates a threat of the loss or the damage of the pledged property, the pledger shall have 
the right to demand that the pledge be terminated in advance. 
Article 344. The Consequences of the Loss or the Damage of the Pledged 
Property 
1. The pledger shall take the risks of an accidental perish or an accidental damage of the pledged 
property, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of pledge. 
2. The pledgee shall be answerable for the full or the partial loss or damage of the object of pledge, 
transferred to him, unless he proves that he may be relieved of the responsibility in conformity with 
Article 401 of the present Code. 
The pledgee shall be answerable for the loss of the object of pledge in the amount of its actual cost, 
and for its damage - in the amount of the sum, by which this cost has been reduced, regardless of the sum, 
by which the object of pledge was estimated at the moment of its transfer to the pledgee. 
If as a result of the damage of the object of pledge it has changed so much that it cannot be any 
more used for its intended purpose, the pledger shall have the right to reject it and to claim the 
compensation for its loss. 
The contract may also stipulate the pledgee's obligation to recompense to the pledger the other 
losses, inflicted upon him by the loss or the damage of the object of pledge. 
The pledger, who is the debtor by the obligation, secured against by the pledge, shall have the right 
to offset his claim against the pledgee for the compensation of the losses, caused to him by the loss or by 
the damage of the object of pledge, when discharging the obligation, secured against by the pledge. 
Article 345. The Replacement and Restoration of the Object of Pledge 
1. The replacement of the object of pledge shall be admitted with the consent of the pledgee, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the law or by the contract. 
2. If the object of pledge has perished or has been damaged, or if the right of ownership to it or the 
right of its economic management has been terminated on the grounds, established by the law, the pledger 
shall have the right to restore the object of pledge or to replace it with the other property of an equal value 
within a reasonable term, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
Article 346. The Use and Disposal of the Object of Pledge 
1. The pledger shall have the right, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract or following from the 
substance of the pledge, to use the object of pledge in conformity with its intended purpose, including 
deriving from it the fruits and incomes. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the contract or following from the substance of the 
pledge, the pledger shall have the right to alienate the object of pledge, to give it in rent or into a 
gratuitous use to another person, or to dispose of it in any other way with the pledgee's consent. 
An agreement, restricting the pledger's right to bequeath the pledged property, shall be insignificant. 
3. The pledgee shall have the right to use the object of pledge, put into his custody, only in the 
cases, stipulated by the contract, and shall regularly present a report on its use to the pledger. By the 
contract, upon the pledgee may be imposed the duty to derive the fruits and incomes from the object of 
pledge for the purpose of discharging the principal obligation or in the interest of the pledger. 
Article 347. The Pledgee's Protection of His Rights to the Object of Pledge 
1. The pledgee, in whose custody the pledged property is or should have been, shall have the right to 
claim it from the other person's illegal possession, including from that of the pledger (Articles 301, 302 
and 305). 
2. In the cases, when by the terms of the contract the pledgee has been granted the right to use the 
object of pledge, transferred to him, he may demand from the other persons, including from the pledger, 
that all violations of his right be removed, even though these violations have not been connected with the 
deprivation of the possession (Articles 304 and 305). 
Article 348. The Grounds for Turning the Penalty onto the Pledged Property 
1. The penalty may be turned onto the pledged property in order to satisfy the pledgee's (the 
creditor's) claims in case of the non-discharge or of an improper discharge by the debtor of the obligation, 
secured against by the pledge, because of the circumstances, for which he is answerable. 
2. The claim for turning the penalty onto the pledged property may be rejected, if the violation, 
committed by the debtor with respect to the obligation, secured against by the pledge, is utterly 
insignificant, and for this reason, the amount of the pledger's claims is obviously out of all proportion 
with the cost of the pledged property. 
Article 349. Procedure for Turning the Penalty onto the Pledged Property 
1. The pledgee's (the creditor's) claims shall be satisfied from the cost of the pledged immovable 
property by the court decision. 
The satisfaction of the pledgee's claim at the expense of the pledged immovable property without 
turning to the court shall be admitted on the grounds of a notarially certified agreement of the pledgee 
with the pledger, concluded between them after the arising of the grounds for turning the penalty onto the 
object of pledge. This agreement may be recognized by the court as invalid upon the claim of the person, 
whose rights have been violated by such an agreement. 
2. The pledgee's rights shall be satisfied at the expense of the pledged movable property by the court 
decision, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement of the pledger with the pledgee. However, the 
penalty shall be turned onto the object of pledge, transferred to the pledgee, in conformity with the 
procedure, established by the contract of pledge, unless the law has laid down a different procedure. 
3. The penalty shall be turned onto the object of pledge only by the court decision in the cases, 
when: 
1) the consent or the permit of the other person or of the other body has been required for the 
conclusion of the contract; 
2) the object of pledge is the property, presenting a considerable historical, artistic or another kind 
of cultural value for society; 
3) the pledger is absent and it is impossible to identify the place of his stay. 
Article 350. Realization of the Pledged Property 
1. The realization (the sale) of the pledged property, onto which, in conformity with Article 349 of 
the present Code, the penalty has been turned, shall be effected by way of selling it at an open auction in 
the order, established by the procedural legislation, unless otherwise laid down by the law. 
2. Upon the request of the pledger, the court shall have the right, in its decision on turning the 
penalty onto the pledged property, to postpone its sale at an open auction for a term of up to one year. The 
delay shall not concern the parties' rights and duties by the obligation, secured against by the pledge of 
this property, and shall not absolve the debtor from recompensing the creditor's losses and the forfeit, 
both of which have mounted over the period of delay. 
3. The initial selling price of the pledged property, from which the bidding starts, shall be fixed by 
the court decision in the cases, when the penalty has been turned onto the property through the court, or 
by an agreement, concluded between the pledgee and the pledger - in the rest of cases. 
The pledged property shall be sold to the person, who offers the highest price at the auction. 
4. In case the auction is declared as having failed, the pledgee shall have the right, by an agreement 
with the pledger, to acquire the pledged property and to offset the selling price by the amount of his 
claims, secured against by the pledge. To such an agreement, the rules of the purchase and sale shall be 
applied. 
In case the repeatedly held auction is declared as having failed, too, the pledgee shall have the right 
to keep the object of pledge to himself, while appraising its cost at an amount, which is not over 10 per 
cent lower than its initial selling price at the repeatedly held auction. 
If the pledgee has not availed himself of the right to keep the object of pledge to himself within one 
month from the day of declaring the repeated auction as having failed, the contract of pledge shall be 
terminated. 
5. If the amount, derived from the realization of the pledged property, proves to be insufficient to 
cover the pledgee's claim, he shall have the right, in the absence of any other instruction in the law or in 
the contract, to obtain the underderived amount from the other property of the debtor, while not enjoying 
the right of priority, based on the pledge. 
6. If the amount, derived from the realization of the pledged property, exceeds the size of the 
pledgee's claim, secured against by the pledge, the difference shall be returned to the pledger. 
7. The debtor and the pledger, who is the third person, shall have the right, at any time before the 
sale of the object of pledge, to terminate the turning onto it of the penalty and its realization by 
discharging the obligation, secured against by the pledge, or that part thereof, whose discharge has been 
delayed. An agreement, restricting this right, shall be regarded as insignificant. 
Article 351. Advanced Discharge of the Obligation, Secured Against by the 
Pledge and Turning of the Obligation onto the Pledged Property 
1. The pledgee shall have the right to demand an advanced discharge of the obligation, secured 
against by the pledge, in the following cases: 
1) if the object of pledge has been withdrawn from the custody of the pledger, with whom it has 
been left, other than in conformity with the terms of the contract of pledge; 
2) if the pledger has violated the rules on the replacement of the object of pledge (Article 345); 
3) if the object of pledge has been lost because of the circumstances, for which the pledger is not 
answerable in case the pledger has not availed himself of the right, stipulated by Item 2, Article 345 of the 
present Code. 
2. The pledgee shall have the right to claim an advanced discharge of the pledge, secured against by 
the pledge, and if his claim is not satisfied, to turn the penalty onto the object of pledge in the following 
cases: 
1) if the pledger has violated the rules on the subsequent pledge (Article 342); 
2) if the pledger has not discharged the duties, stipulated by Subitems 1 and 2 of Item 1 and by Item 
2, Article 343 of the present Code; 
3) if the pledger has violated the rules on the disposal of the pledged property (Item 2 of Article 
346). 
Article 352. Termination of the Pledge 
1. The pledge shall be terminated: 
1) with the termination of the obligation, secured against by the pledge; 
2) upon the demand of the pledger in the presence of the circumstances, stipulated by Item 3, Article 
343 of the present Code; 
3) in case of the perish of the pledged thing or of the termination of the pledged right, unless the 
pledger has availed himself of the right, stipulated by Item 2, Article 345 of the present Code; 
4) in case of the sale of the pledged property at an open auction, and also in case of its realization 
proving to be impossible (Item 4 of Article 350). 
2. About the termination of the mortgage, a note shall be made in the register, into which the 
mortgage contract has been entered. 
3. Upon the termination of the pledge as a result of the discharge of the obligation, secured against 
by the pledge, or upon the pledger's claim (Item 3 of Article 343), the pledgee, in whose custody the 
pledged property has been kept, shall immediately return it to the pledger. 
Article 353. Maintaining the Pledge in Force When the Right to the Pledged 
Property Is Transferred to Another Person 
1. If the right of ownership to the pledged property, or the right of the economic management of this 
property is transferred from the pledger to another person as a result of a pecuniary or gratuitous 
alienation of this property or by way of the universal legal succession, the right of pledge shall be 
maintained in force. 
The legal successor of the pledger shall occupy the place of the pledger and shall discharge all his 
duties, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement with the pledgee. 
2. If the property of the pledger, which is the object of pledge, has passed, by way of the legal 
succession, to several persons, each one of the legal successors (acquirers of the property) shall bear the 
consequences, following from the non-discharge of the obligation, secured against by the pledge, in 
proportion to that part of the said property, which has passed to him. However, in case the object of 
pledge is indivisible or remains in the common ownership of the legal successors, they shall become joint 
pledgers. 
Article 354. The Consequences of the Forcible Withdrawal of the Pledged 
Property 
1. If the pledger's right of ownership to the property, which is the object of pledge, is terminated on 
the grounds and in the way, established by the law, as a result of the withdrawal (redemption) for the state 
or for the municipal needs, of the requisition or of the nationalization, and if the pledger is given the other 
property or the corresponding compensation, the right of pledge shall be extended to the new property, 
given instead of the old property, or the pledgee shall correspondingly acquire the right of priority in the 
satisfaction of his claim from the amount of the compensation due to the pledger. The pledgee shall also 
have the right to claim an advanced discharge of the obligation, secured against by the pledge. 
2. In the cases, when the property, which is the object of pledge, is withdrawn from the pledger in 
conformity with the law-established order on the ground that another person is in actual fact the owner of 
this property (Article 301), or as a sanction for committing a crime or for another violation of the law 
(Article 243), the pledge with respect to this property shall be terminated. In these cases, the pledger shall 
have the right to claim an advanced discharge of the obligation, secured against by the pledge. 
Article 355. The Cession of the Rights by the Contract of Pledge 
The pledgee shall have the right to transfer his rights by the contract of pledge to another person, 
while observing the rules on the transfer of rights by the cession of the claim (Articles 382-390). 
The cession by the pledgee of his rights by the contract of pledge to another person shall be valid, if 
the rights of claim against the debtor by the principal obligation, secured against by the pledge, have also 
been ceded to the same person. 
Unless otherwise proved, the cession of the rights by the contract of mortgage shall also imply the 
cession of the rights by the obligation, secured against by the mortgage. 
Article 356. Transfer of the Debt by the Obligation, Secured Against by the 
Pledge 
In case of the transfer of the obligation, secured against by the pledge, to another person, the pledge 
shall be terminated, if the pledger has not given his consent to the creditor to be answerable for the new 
debtor. 
Article 357. The Pledge of Commodities in Circulation 
1. The pledge of commodities in circulation shall be recognized as the pledge of commodities with 
leaving them in the pledger's custody and with granting the latter the right to modify the composition and 
the natural form of the pledged property (the commodity stocks, the raw and other materials, the semi
finished and finished products, etc.), provided that their total cost does not become less than that indicated 
in the contract of pledge. 
The reduction of the cost of the pledged commodities in circulation shall be admitted in proportion 
to the discharged share of the obligation, secured against by the pledge, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
contract. 
2. The commodities in circulation, alienated by the pledger, shall cease to be the object of pledge 
from the moment of their passing into the ownership or into the economic or the operation management 
of the acquirer, while the commodities, acquired by the pledger, which have been indicated in the contract 
of pledge, shall become the object of pledge from the moment, when the right of their ownership or of 
their economic management arises with the pledger. 
3. The pledger of the commodities in circulation shall be obliged to keep a register for entering the 
pledges, into which he shall make entries on the terms of the pledge of the commodities and on all the 
operations, entailing the change of the composition or of the natural form of the pledged commodities, 
including their processing, by the date of the last operation. 
4. In case the pledger violates the terms of the pledge of commodities in circulation, the pledgee 
shall have the right to hold up the operations with them by way of putting upon them his signs and seals 
until the elimination of the violation. 
Article 358. Pawning of Things at the Pawn-Shop 
Federal Law No. 15-FZ of January 10, 2003 amended Item 1 of Article 358 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
1. The movable property, intended for personal use, may be accepted as a security against a short
term credit by way of the business activity of specialized organizations - the pawn-shops. 
2. The contract on pawning things at the pawn-shop shall be legalized by issuing by the pawn-shop 
of a pawn-ticket. 
3. The pawned things shall be passed to the pawn-shop. 
The pawn-shop shall be obliged to insure the things in favour of the pawner at its own expense in 
the full amount of their estimated cost, made in conformity with the prices of things of the same category 
and standard, usually fixed in trade by the moment of their being accepted in pawn. 
The pawn-shop shall not have the right to use and to dispose of the things in pawn. 
4. The pawn-shop shall bear responsibility for the loss and the damage of the pawned things, unless 
it proves that the loss and the damage have occurred because of a force-majeure. 
5. In case the credit, secured against by the pawn of things at the pawn-shop, has not been repaid 
within the fixed term, the pawn-shop shall have the right, on the ground of the notary's executive 
endorsement, and after the expiry of one month's extra term, to sell this property in the order, laid down 
for the realization of the pledged property (Items 3, 4, 6 and 7 of Article 350). After this, the claims of the 
pawn- shop against the pawner (the debtor) shall be regarded as satisfied, even if the amount, derived 
from the realization of the pawned property, is insufficient to cover them in full. 
On illegality of refusal of notaries to make out executive notations on the documents presented by 
pawn shops see Letter of the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation No. 09-11-1924-96 of May 
13, 1997  
6. The rules for the citizens' crediting by the pawn-shops under the pledge of things, belonging to 
the citizens, shall be laid down by the law and by the present Code. 
7. The terms of the contract on the pawn of things at the pawn-shop, restricting the rights of the 
pledger as compared with the rights, granted to him by the present Code and by the other laws, shall be 
insignificant. Instead of such terms, the corresponding provisions of the law shall be applied. 
_ 4. The Retention 
Article 359. The Grounds for the Retention 
1. The creditor, in whose custody is the thing, subject to the transfer to the debtor or to the person, 
named by the debtor, shall have the right, in case the debtor fails to discharge in time the obligation on the 
payment for this thing or on the compensation to the creditor of the expenses and of the other losses he 
has borne in connection with it, to retain it until the corresponding obligation is discharged. 
By way of the thing's retention may also be secured the claims, which, while not being connected 
with the payment for the thing or with the compensation of the expenses and of the other losses, have 
nevertheless arisen from the obligation, whose parties are acting as businessmen. 
2. The creditor may retain the thing in his custody, despite the fact that after this thing has passed 
into the creditor's possession, the rights to it have been acquired by the third person. 
3. The rules of the present Article shall be applied, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
Article 360. Satisfaction of Claims at the Expense of the Retained Property 
The claims of the creditor, who is retaining the thing, shall be satisfied from its cost in the volume 
and in the order, stipulated for the satisfaction of the claims, secured against by the pledge. 
_ 5. The Surety 
On the practice in resolving the disputes, arising in connection with the application by the arbitration 
courts of the norms of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation on the surety see the review (appendix 
to Informational Letter of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 28 of January 
20, 1998)  
Article 361. The Contract of Surety 
By the contract of surety, the surety shall be obliged to the creditor of the other person to be 
answerable for the latter's discharge of his obligation in full or in part. 
The contract of surety may also be concluded to provide security for an obligation, which will arise 
in the future. 
Article 362. The Form of the Contract of Surety 
The contract of surety shall be legalized in written form. The non-observance of the written form 
shall entail the invalidity of the contract of surety. 
Article 363. Responsibility of the Surety 
1. In case of the failure to discharge, or of an improper discharge by the debtor, of the obligation, 
secured by the surety, the surety and the debtor shall be jointly answerable to the creditor, unless the 
surety's subsidiary liability is stipulated by the law or by the contract of surety. 
2. The surety shall be answerable to the creditor in the same volume as the debtor, including the 
payment of the interest, the compensation of the court expenses, involved in the exaction of the debt and 
of the other losses, borne by the creditor, which have been caused by the debtor's non-discharge or 
improper discharge of the obligation, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of surety. 
3. The persons, who have provided a joint surety, shall be jointly answerable to the creditor, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the contract of surety. 
Article 364. The Right of the Surety to Object to the Creditor's Claim 
The surety shall have the right to put forward against the creditor's claim the objections, which could 
have been put forward by the debtor, unless otherwise following from the contract of surety. The surety 
shall not lose the right to these objections even in case the debtor has renounced them or has recognized 
his debt. 
Article 365. The Rights of the Surety, Who Has Discharged the Obligation 
1. To the surety, who has discharged the obligation, shall pass the creditor's rights by this obligation 
and also the rights, which have belonged to the creditor as the pledgee, in the volume, in which the surety 
has satisfied the creditor's claim. The surety shall also have the right to claim that the debtor pay the 
interest on the amount of money, paid up to the creditor, and recompense the other losses, which he has 
borne in connection with the liability for the debtor. 
2. After the surety has discharged the obligation, the creditor shall be obliged to pass to the surety 
the documents, certifying the claim against the debtor, and to transfer to him the rights, securing this 
claim. 
3. The rules, established by the present Article, shall be applied, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
law, by the other legal acts or by the contract, concluded by the surety with the debtor, or unless 
otherwise following from the relationships between them. 
Article 366. Notification of the Surety on the Debtor's Discharge of the 
Obligation 
The debtor, who has discharged the obligation, secured against by the surety, shall immediately 
notify about it the surety. Otherwise, the surety, who in his turn has discharged the obligation, shall have 
the right to exact from the creditor what he has groundlessly obtained, or to file the claim of regress 
against the debtor. In the latter case, the debtor shall have the right to exact from the creditor only what 
has been groundlessly obtained. 
Article 367. Termination of the Obligation 
1. The surety shall be terminated with the termination of the secured obligation, and also in case of 
the amendment of this obligation, entailing an increase of the liability, or the other unfavourable 
consequences for the surety without the latter's consent. 
2. The surety shall be terminated as a result of the transfer to another person of the debt by the 
obligation, secured by the surety, unless the surety has given his consent to the creditor to be answerable 
for the new debtor. 
3. The surety shall be terminated, if the creditor has refused to accept the proper discharge, offered 
by the debtor or by the surety. 
4. The surety shall be terminated after the expiry of the term, indicated in the contract of surety, for 
which it has been issued. In case such term has not been stipulated, the surety shall be terminated, if the 
creditor does not file the claim against the debtor in the course of one year from the date of the expiry of 
the term, fixed for the discharge of the secured obligation. If the term of the discharge of the principal 
obligation has not been stipulated and cannot be defined, or if it has been defined by the moment of the 
demand, the surety shall be terminated, unless the creditor files the claim against the surety in the course 
of two years from the date, when the contract of surety was concluded. 
_ 6. The Bank Guarantee 
See review of the practice of resolving disputes connected with the application of the rules of the Civil 
Code of the Russian Federation on bank guarantees (the appendix to Informational Letter of the Higher 
Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 27 of January 15, 1998)  
Article 368. The Concept of the Bank Guarantee 
By force of the bank guarantee, the bank, the other credit institution or the insurance company (the 
guarantor) shall issue, upon the request of the other person (the principal) a written obligation to pay to 
the creditor (the beneficiary), in conformity with the terms of the obligation, given by the guarantor, a 
certain amount of money upon the beneficiary's presenting the written claim on its payment. 
Article 369. Security by the Bank Guarantee of the Principal's Obligation 
1. The bank guarantee shall provide for the proper discharge by the principal of his obligation to the 
beneficiary (the principal obligation). 
2. The principal shall pay out to the guarantor a reward for the issue of the bank guarantee. 
Article 370. Independence of the Bank Guarantee from the Principal Obligation 
The obligation of the guarantor to the beneficiary, stipulated by the bank guarantee, shall not depend 
in the relationships between them upon that principal obligation, to provide for whose discharge it has 
been issued, even if the guarantee contains a reference to this obligation. 
Article 371. Irrevocability of the Bank Guarantee 
The bank guarantee shall not be revoked by the guarantor, unless otherwise stipulated in it. 
Article 372. Untransferability of the Rights by the Bank Guarantee 
The right of claim against the guarantor, possessed by the beneficiary by the bank guarantee, shall 
not be transferred to the other person, unless otherwise stipulated in the guarantee. 
Article 373. The Coming of the Bank Guarantee in Force 
The bank guarantee shall come in force from the date of its issue, unless otherwise stipulated in it. 
Article 374. Presentation of the Claim by the Bank Guarantee 
1. The beneficiary's claim for the payment of the sum of money by the bank guarantee shall be 
presented to the guarantor in written form, with the documents, indicated in the guarantee, enclosed to it. 
The beneficiary shall point out, either in the claim itself or in the enclosed documents, in what consists 
the principal's violation of the principal obligation, to secure which the guarantee was issued. 
2. The beneficiary's claim shall be presented to the guarantor before the expiry of the term, defined 
in the guarantee, for which it has been issued. 
Article 375. The Guarantor's Obligations in Considering the Beneficiary's Claim 
1. On receiving the beneficiary's claim, the guarantor shall without delay notify about it the principal 
and shall pass to him the copies of the claim with all the related documents. 
2. The guarantor shall be obliged to examine the beneficiary's claim and the enclosed documents 
within a reasonable term, displaying a reasonable solicitude in order to establish, whether or not the claim 
and the enclosed documents correspond to the terms of the guarantee. 
Article 376. The Guarantor's Refusal to Satisfy the Beneficiary's Claim 
1. The guarantor shall refuse to satisfy the beneficiary's claim, if this claim or the documents 
enclosed to it do not correspond to the terms of the guarantee or if they are presented to the guarantor 
after the expiry of the term, fixed in the guarantee. 
The guarantor shall be obliged to immediately notify the beneficiary about the refusal to satisfy his 
claim. 
2. If the guarantor has learned before the satisfaction of the beneficiary's claim that the principal 
obligation, secured against by the bank guarantee, has already been discharged in full or in the 
corresponding part, that it has been terminated on the other grounds or has been invalidated, he shall be 
obliged to immediately notify about this the beneficiary and the principal. 
The repeated beneficiary's claim, received by the guarantor after such a notification, shall be liable 
to satisfaction by the guarantor. 
Article 377. The Limits of the Guarantor's Obligation 
1. The guarantor's obligation to the beneficiary, stipulated by the bank guarantee, shall be limited by 
the payment of the sum of money, for which the guarantee was issued. 
2. The guarantor's responsibility to the beneficiary for his non-discharge or improper discharge of 
the obligation by the guarantee shall not be limited to the sum of money, for which the guarantee was 
issued, unless otherwise stipulated in the guarantee. 
Article 378. Termination of the Bank Guarantee 
1. The guarantor's obligation to the beneficiary by the guarantee shall be terminated: 
1) by the payment to the beneficiary of the sum of money, for which the guarantee was issued; 
2) after the expiry of the term, fixed in the guarantee, for which it was issued; 
3) as a result of the beneficiary's renouncement of his rights by the guarantee and his return of the 
guarantee to the guarantor; 
4) as a result of the beneficiary's renouncement of his rights by the guarantee by way of his handing 
in of a written application on relieving the guarantor of his obligations. 
The termination of the guarantor's obligation on the grounds, pointed out in Subitems 1, 2 and 4 of 
the present Item, shall not depend on whether or not the guarantee has been returned to him. 
2. The guarantor, who has learned about the termination of the guarantee, shall be obliged to 
immediately notify about it the principal. 
Article 379. The Guarantor's Claims of Regress to the Principal 
1. The guarantor's right to claim by way of regress that the principal recompense the sums of money, 
paid to the beneficiary by the bank guarantee, shall be defined by the agreement, concluded between the 
guarantor and the principal, for the discharge of which the guarantee was issued. 
2. The guarantor shall not have the right to claim that the principal return the sums of money, paid to 
the beneficiary other than in correspondence with the terms of the guarantee, or for the violation of the 
guarantor's obligation to the beneficiary, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement, concluded 
between the guarantor and the principal. 
_ 7. The Advance 
Article 380. The Concept of the Advance. The Form of an Agreement on the 
Advance 
1. The advance shall be recognized as the sum of money, issued by one of the contracting parties to 
offset the payments to the other party due from it, as a proof that the contract has been concluded and that 
its discharge has been secured against. 
2. The agreement on the advance, regardless of the sum of money involved, shall be effected in 
written form. 
3. In case of the doubt about whether the sum of money, paid to offset the payments, due from the 
party by the contract, is the advance, in particular, as a result of the non-abidance by the rule, laid down 
by Item 2 of the present Article, this sum of money shall be regarded as paid up by way of an advance, 
unless proved otherwise. 
Article 381. The Consequences of the Termination and of the Non-Discharge of 
the Obligation, Secured Against by the Advance 
1. If the obligation is terminated before the start of its discharge by an agreement between the 
parties or as a result of its discharge being impossible (Article 416), the advance shall be returned. 
2. If the responsibility for the non-performance of the contract lies with the party, which has given 
the advance, it shall be left with the other party. If the responsibility for the non-performance of the 
contract lies with the party, which has received the advance, it shall be obliged to pay to the other party 
the double amount of the advance. 
In addition, the party, responsible for the non-execution of the contract, shall be obliged to 
recompense to the other party the losses, offsetting the amount of the advance, unless otherwise stipulated 
by the contract. 
Chapter 24. The Substitution of Persons in an Obligation 
_ 1. The Transfer of the Creditor's Rights to Another Person 
Article 382. The Grounds and the Order of the Transfer of the Creditor's Rights 
to Another Person 
1. The right (the claim), belonging to the creditor on the grounds of an obligation, may be 
transferred by him to another person by the deal (the cession of the claim), or may pass to another person 
on the legal grounds. 
The rules on the transfer of the creditor's rights to another person shall not be applied to the claims 
of regress. 
2. To effect the transfer to another person, the consent of the debtor shall not be required, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the law or by the contract. 
3. If the debtor has not been notified in written form on the effected transfer of the creditor's rights 
to another person, the new creditor shall bear the risk of the unfavourable consequences, which may arise 
for him as a result of this. In this case, the discharge of the obligation to the primary creditor shall be 
recognized as the discharge to the proper creditor. 
Article 383. The Rights, Which May not Be Passed to the Other Persons 
The transfer to the other person of the rights, inseparably linked with the creditor's personality, in 
particular, with the claims for the alimony and for the compensation of the harm, caused to the life or to 
the health, shall not be admitted. 
Article 384. The Scope of the Creditor's Rights, Transferred to the Other Person 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the contract, the right of the primary creditor shall be 
passed to the new creditor in the volume and on the terms, which have existed by the moment of the 
transfer of the right. In particular, to the new creditor shall pass the rights, guaranteeing the discharge of 
the obligations, and also the other rights, involved in the claim, including the right to the unpaid interest. 
Article 385. The Proofs of the Rights of the New Creditor 
1. The debtor shall have the right not to discharge the obligation to the new creditor, until the proofs 
of the transfer of the claim to this person have been presented to him. 
2. The creditor, who has ceded the claim to the other person, shall be obliged to pass to him the 
documents, certifying the right of the claim, and to supply to him the information, which is important for 
the discharge of the claim. 
Article 386. The Debtor's Objections to the New Creditor's Claim 
The debtor shall have the right to put forward objections against the new creditor's claims, which he 
has had to the primary creditor by the moment of receiving the notification about the transfer of the rights 
by the obligation to the new creditor. 
Article 387. The Transfer of the Creditor's Rights to the Other Person on the 
Grounds of the Law 
The creditor's rights by the obligation shall pass to the other person on the grounds of the law and of 
the occurrence of the circumstances, pointed out in it: - as a consequence of the universal legal succession in the creditor's rights; - by the court decision on the transfer of the creditor's rights to the other person, when the possibility 
of such transfer is stipulated by the law; - as a consequence of the discharge of the debtor's obligation by his surety or by the pledger, who is 
not the debtor by this obligation; - in the subrogation to the insurer of the creditor's rights with respect to the debtor, responsible for 
the occurrence of the insurance case; - in the other law-stipulated cases. 
Article 388. The Terms for Ceding the Claim 
1. The creditor's ceding of the claim to the other person shall be admitted, unless it contradicts the 
law, the other legal acts or the contract. 
2. The cession of the claim by the obligation, in which the creditor's personality is of essential 
importance for the debtor, shall not be admitted without the debtor's consent. 
Article 389. The Form of Ceding the Claim 
1. The cession of the claim, based on the deal, performed in the simple written or in the notarial 
form, shall be effected in the corresponding written form. 
2. The cession of the claim by the deal, requiring the state registration, shall be registered in 
conformity with the order, established for the registration of this deal, unless otherwise established by the 
law. 
3. The cession of the claim by the order security shall be effected by way of making an endorsement 
upon this security (Item 3 of Article 146). 
Article 390. Responsibility of the Creditor, Who Has Ceded the Claim 
The primary creditor, who has ceded the claim, shall be answerable to the new creditor for the 
invalidity of the claim, transferred to the latter, but shall not be answerable for the non-satisfaction of this 
claim by the debtor, with the exception of the cases, when the primary creditor has assumed upon himself 
the surety for the debtor to the new creditor. 
_ 2. The Transfer of the Debt 
Article 391. The Terms and the Form of the Transfer of the Debt 
1. The transfer by the debtor of his debt to the other person shall be admitted only with the creditor's 
consent. 
2. To the form of the transfer of the debt shall be correspondingly applied the rules, contained in 
Items 1 and 2, Article 389 of the present Code. 
Article 392. Objections of the New Debtor Against the Creditor's Claim 
The new debtor shall have the right to put forward objections against the creditor's claims, based on 
the relationships between the creditor and the primary debtor. 
Chapter 25. Responsibility for the Violation of Obligations 
Article 393. The Debtor's Obligation to Recompense the Losses 
1. The debtor shall be obliged to recompense to the creditor the losses, caused to him by the non
discharge or by an improper discharge of the obligations. 
2. The losses shall be defined in conformity with the rules, stipulated by Article 15 of the present 
Code. 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law, by the other legal acts or by the agreement, when defining 
the losses, the prices shall be taken into account, which existed in the place, where the obligation should 
have been discharged, on the date of the debtor's voluntary satisfaction of the creditor's claims, and if the 
claim has not been voluntarily satisfied - on the date of its presentation. Proceeding from the 
circumstances, the court may satisfy the claim for the compensation of the losses, taking into account the 
prices, which existed on the day of its adopting the decision. 
4. When defining the lost profit, the measures, taken by the creditor to derive it, and the 
preparations, made for the same purpose, shall be considered. 
Article 394. The Losses and the Forfeit 
1. If for the non-discharge or an improper discharge of the obligation the forfeit has been ruled, the 
losses shall be recompensed in the part, which has not been covered by the forfeit. 
The law or the agreement may stipulate the cases: when only the forfeit, but not the losses shall be 
exacted; when the losses may be exacted in full above the forfeit; when, according to the creditor's 
choice, either the forfeit or the losses may be exacted. 
2. In the cases, when a limited responsibility for the non-discharge or an improper discharge of the 
obligation has been established (Article 400), the losses, liable to compensation in the part, not covered 
by the forfeit, or above it, or instead of it, may be exacted up to the limit, fixed by such a restriction. 
Article 395. Responsibility for the Non-Discharge of the Pecuniary Obligation 
1. For the use of the other person's money as a result of its illegal retention, of the avoidance of its 
return or of another kind of delay in its payment, or as a result of its ungroundless receipt or saving at the 
expense of the other person, the interest on the total amount of these means shall be due. The interest rate 
shall be defined by the discount rate of the bank interest, existing by the date of the discharge of the 
pecuniary obligation or of the corresponding part thereof at the place of the creditor's residence, and if the 
creditor is a legal entity - at the place of its location. If the debt is exacted through the court, the court 
may satisfy the creditor's claim, proceeding from the discount rate of the bank interest on the date of 
filing the claim or on the date of its adopting the decision. These rules shall be applied, unless the other 
interest rate has been fixed by the law or by the agreement. 
2. If the losses, caused to the creditor by an illegal use of his money, exceed the amount of the 
interest, due to him on the ground of Item 1 of the present Article, he shall have the right to claim that the 
debtor recompense him the losses in the part, exceeding this amount. 
3. The interest for the use of the other person's means shall be exacted by the date of payment of the 
amount of these means to the creditor, unless the law, the other legal acts or the contract have fixed a 
shorter term for the calculation of the interest. 
On the Practice of the Application of the Provisions of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation on 
Interest for the Use of Someone Else's Monetary Funds see Decision of the Plenum of the Supreme 
Court of the Russian Federation and the Plenum of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian 
Federation No. 13/14 of October 8, 1998  
Article 396. Responsibility and the Discharge of Obligations in Kind 
1. The payment of the forfeit and the compensation of the losses in case of an improper discharge of 
the obligation shall not absolve the debtor from the discharge of the obligations in kind, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the law or by the contract. 
2. The compensation of the losses in case of the non-discharge of the obligation and the payment of 
the forfeit for its non-discharge shall absolve the debtor from the discharge of the obligation in kind, 
unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the contract. 
3. The creditor's refusal to accept the discharge, which as a consequence of the delay has lost all 
interest for him (Item 2 of Article 405), and also the payment of the forfeit, imposed by way of 
compensation (Article 409), shall absolve the debtor from the discharge of the obligation in kind. 
Article 397. Discharge of the Obligation at the Debtor's Expense 
In case of the non-discharge by the debtor of the obligation to manufacture and transfer the thing 
into the ownership, into the economic or into the operation management, or into the use of the creditor, or 
to perform for him a certain job, or to render him a service, the creditor shall have the right, within a 
reasonable term and for a reasonable pay, to commission the third persons with the performance of the 
obligation, or to perform it through his own effort, unless otherwise following from the law, the other 
legal acts or the contract, or from the substance of the obligation, and to claim that the debtor recompense 
the necessary expenses and the other losses he has borne. 
Article 398. The Consequences of the Non-discharge of the Obligation to 
Transfer an Individually-definite Thing 
In case of the non-discharge of the obligation to transfer an individually-definite thing into the 
ownership, into the economic or the operation management, or into the gratuitous use of the creditor, the 
latter shall have the right to claim the forcible withdrawal of this thing from the debtor and its transfer to 
the creditor on the terms, stipulated by the obligation. This right shall cease to exist, if the thing has 
already been transferred to the third person, possessing the right of ownership, of economic or of 
operation management. If the thing has not yet been transferred, the right of priority shall belong to that 
creditor, with respect to whom the obligation has arisen at an earlier date, and if this is impossible to 
establish - to that creditor, who has filed the claim at an earlier date. 
Instead of the claim for the transfer to him of the thing, which is the object of the obligation, the 
creditor shall have the right to claim the compensation of his losses. 
Article 399. The Subsidiary Liability 
1. Before presenting the claims against the person, who, in conformity with the law, with the other 
legal acts or with the terms of the obligation, is bearing liability in addition to the liability of the other 
person, who is the principal debtor (the subsidiary liability), the creditor shall be obliged to present the 
claim against the principal debtor. 
If the principal debtor has refused to satisfy the claim of the creditor, or if the creditor has not 
received from him, within a reasonable term, a response to the presented claim, this claim may be 
presented against the person, bearing the subsidiary liability. 
2. The creditor shall have no right to claim the satisfaction of his claim against the principal debtor 
from the person, bearing the subsidiary liability, if this claim may be satisfied by offsetting the claim of 
regress to the principal debtor, or by an indisputable recovery of the means involved from the principal 
debtor. 
3. The person, bearing the subsidiary liability, shall be obliged, before satisfying the claim, 
presented against him by the creditor, to warn about it the principal debtor, and if the claim has been filed 
against such a person - to draw the principal debtor into the court case. Otherwise, the principal debtor 
shall have the right to put forward against the claim of regress of the person, bearing the subsidiary 
liability, the objections, which he has had against the creditor. 
Article 400. Limitation of the Scope of Liability by Obligations 
1. By the individual kinds of obligations and by those obligations, which are related to a definite 
type of activity, the right to the full compensation of the losses may be limited by the law (the limited 
responsibility). 
2. The agreement on limiting the scope of the debtor's responsibility by the contract of affiliation or 
by another kind of contract, in which the creditor is the citizen, coming out in the capacity of the 
consumer, shall be insignificant, if the scope of responsibility for the given kind of obligations or for the 
given violation has been defined by the law and if the agreement has been concluded before the setting in 
of the circumstances, entailing the responsibility for the non-discharge or for an improper discharge of the 
obligation. 
Article 401. The Grounds of Responsibility for the Violation of the Obligation 
1. The person, who has not discharged the obligation or who has discharged it in an improper way, 
shall bear responsibility for this, if it has happened through his fault (an ill intention or carelessness on his 
part), with the exception of the cases, when the other grounds of the responsibility have been stipulated by 
the law or by the contract. 
The person shall be recognized as not guilty, if, taking into account the extent of the care and 
caution, which has been expected from him in the face of the nature and the terms of the circulation, he 
has taken all the necessary measures for properly discharging the obligation. 
2. The absence of the guilt shall be proven by the person, who has violated the obligation. 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the contract, the person, who has failed to discharge, 
or has discharged in an improper way, the obligation, while performing the business activity, shall bear 
responsibility, unless he proves that the proper discharge has been impossible because of a force-majeure, 
i.e., because of the extraordinary circumstances, which it was impossible to avert under the given 
conditions. To such kind of circumstances shall not be referred, in particular, the violations of obligations 
on the part of the debtor's counter-agents, or the absence on the market of commodities, indispensable for 
the discharge, or the absence of the necessary means at the debtor's disposal. 
4. An agreement on eliminating or limiting the liability for an intentional violation of the obligation, 
concluded at an earlier date, shall be insignificant. 
Article 402. The Debtor's Responsibility for His Employees 
The actions of the debtor's employees, involved in the discharge of his obligation, shall be regarded 
as those of the debtor himself. The debtor shall be answerable for these actions, if they have caused the 
non-discharge or an improper discharge of the obligation. 
Article 403. The Debtor's Responsibility for the Actions of the Third Persons 
The debtor shall be answerable for an improper discharge of the obligation by the third persons, on 
whom the discharge of the obligation has been imposed, unless it has been laid down by the law that the 
responsibility shall be borne by the third person, who has been an immediate discharger. 
Article 404. The Creditor's Guilt 
1. If the non-discharge or an improper discharge of the obligation has occurred through the fault of 
both parties, the court shall correspondingly reduce the scope of the debtor's responsibility. The court 
shall also have the right to reduce the scope of the debtor's responsibility, if the creditor has intentionally 
or through carelessness contributed to the increase of the losses, caused by the non-discharge or by an 
improper discharge, or if he has not taken reasonable measures to reduce them. 
2. The rules of Item 1 of the present Article shall also be correspondingly applied in the cases, when 
the debtor, by force of the law or of the contract, bears responsibility for the non-discharge or for an 
improper discharge of the obligation regardless of whether he is, or is not, at fault. 
Article 405. The Debtor's Delay 
1. The debtor, who has failed to discharge the obligation on time, shall be answerable to the creditor 
for the losses, inflicted by the delay, and also for the consequences of the discharge having accidentally 
become impossible during the period of the delay. 
2. If, because of the debtor's delay, the discharge has lost all interest for the creditor, he shall have 
the right to refuse to accept the discharge and to claim the compensation of the involved losses. 
3. The debtor shall not be regarded as guilty of the delay during the period of time, when the 
obligation could not have been discharged because of the creditor's delay. 
Article 406. The Creditor's Delay 
1. The creditor shall be regarded as guilty of the delay, if he has refused to accept the proper 
discharge, offered to him by the debtor, or if he has not performed the actions, stipulated by the law, by 
the other legal acts, or by the contract, or those stemming from the customs of the business turnover or 
from the substance of the obligation, before the performance of which the debtor could not have 
discharged his obligation. 
The creditor shall also be regarded as guilty of the delay in the cases, pointed out in Item 2 of 
Article 408 of the present Code. 
2. The creditor's delay shall give to the debtor the right to the compensation of losses, caused to him 
by the said delay, unless the creditor proves that the delay has occurred through the circumstances, for 
which neither he himself, nor the persons, to whom, by force of the law, of the other legal acts or of the 
creditor's commission, the acceptance of the discharge has been entrusted, are answerable. 
3. The debtor shall not be obliged to pay the interest by the pecuniary obligation over the period of 
the creditor's delay. 
Chapter 26. The Termination of Obligations 
Article 407. The Grounds for the Termination of Obligations 
1. The obligation shall be terminated in full or in part on the grounds, stipulated by the present 
Code, by the other laws and the other legal acts, or by the contract. 
2. The termination of the obligation upon the claim of one of the parties shall be admitted only in 
the cases, stipulated by the law or by the contract. 
Article 408. The Termination of the Obligation by the Discharge 
1. The proper discharge shall terminate the obligation. 
2. While accepting the discharge, the creditor shall be obliged, upon the debtor's claim, to give him a 
receipt for accepting the discharge in full or in the corresponding part thereof. 
If the debtor has issued to the creditor a promissory document to certify the obligation, the creditor, 
while accepting the discharge, shall be obliged to return it, and in case it is impossible to return the said 
document, he shall be obliged to indicate this in the receipt he issues. The receipt may be replaced by an 
inscription made on the returned document. The debtor's custody of the promissory document shall certify 
the termination of the obligation, unless otherwise proved. 
If the creditor refuses to issue the receipt, to return to the debtor the promissory document, or to 
indicate in the receipt that it is impossible to return it, the debtor shall have the right to delay the 
discharge. In these cases, the creditor shall be regarded as having delayed it. 
Article 409. The Indemnity 
By an agreement between the parties, the obligation may be terminated by way of paying an 
indemnity instead of the discharge (the payment of money, the transfer of the property, etc.). The amount, 
the term and the procedure for paying the indemnity shall be established by the parties. 
Article 410. Termination of the Obligation by an Offset 
The obligation shall be terminated in full or in part by offsetting a similar claim of regress, whose 
deadline has arrived or has not been fixed, or has been defined by the moment of the demand. For the 
offset, the application from one of the parties shall be sufficient. 
See also Review of the Practice of Resolving Disputes, Involved in the Termination of a Liability by 
Offsetting Similar Counter Claims given by Informational Letter of the Presidium of the Higher 
Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 65 of December 29, 2001  
Article 411. The Cases of the Offset Being Inadmissible 
Inadmissible shall be the offset of the claims: - if, by the application of the other party, the term of the limitation of actions shall be applicable to 
the given claim, and the said term has expired; - for the compensation of the harm, inflicted to the life or to the health; 
- on the exaction of the alimony; - for the life maintenance; - in the other cases, stipulated by the law or by the contract. 
Article 412. The Offset in the Cession of the Claim 
In case of the cession of the claim, the debtor shall have the right to offset against the claim of the 
new creditor his own claim of regress against the primary creditor. 
The offset shall be effected, if the claim has arisen on the grounds, which have existed by the 
moment of the debtor's receipt of the notification about the cession of the claim, and if the deadline of the 
claim has set in before its receipt or if this deadline has not been indicated or defined by the moment of 
the demand. 
Article 413. Termination of the Obligation by the Debtor and the Creditor 
Coinciding in One Person 
The obligation shall be terminated in case the debtor and the creditor coincide in a single person. 
Article 414. Termination of the Obligation by the Novation 
1. The obligation shall be terminated by an agreement between the parties on replacing the primary 
obligation, which has existed between them, with another obligation between the same persons, 
stipulating a different object or a different way of the discharge (the novation). 
2. The novation shall not be admissible with respect to the obligations on the compensation for the 
harm, inflicted to the life or to the health, and also with respect to those on the alimony. 
3. The novation shall terminate the additional liabilities, connected with the primary obligation, 
unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement between the parties. 
Article 415. Forgiving the Debt 
The obligation shall be terminated by the creditor's absolving the debtor from the obligations, borne 
by him, if this does not violate the rights of the other persons with respect to the creditor's property. 
Article 416. Termination of the Obligation Because of the Impossibility to 
Discharge It 
1. The obligation shall be terminated because of the impossibility to discharge it, caused by the 
circumstance, for which neither of the parties is answerable. 
2. In case of the impossibility for the debtor to discharge the obligation because of the faulty actions 
of the creditor, the latter shall not have the right to claim the return of what he has discharged by the 
obligation. 
Article 417. Termination of the Obligation on the Grounds of an Act, Issued by 
the State Body 
1. If as a result of an act, issued by the state body, the discharge of the obligation has become 
impossible in full or in part, the obligation shall be terminated in full or in the corresponding part. The 
parties, which have suffered losses as a result of this, shall have the right to claim their compensation in 
conformity with Articles 13 and 16 of the present Code. 
2. In case the act, issued by the state body, on whose grounds the obligation has been terminated, is 
recognized as invalid in conformity with the established procedure, the obligation shall be restored, unless 
otherwise following from the agreement between the parties or from the substance of the obligation and 
unless its discharge has lost all interest for the creditor. 
Article 418. Termination of the Obligation with the Citizen's Death 
1. The obligation shall be terminated with the death of the debtor, if it cannot be discharged without 
the debtor's personal participation, or if it is indissolubly linked with the debtor's personality in any other 
way. 
2. The obligation shall be terminated with the death of the creditor, if its discharge is intended 
personally for the creditor, or if the obligation is indissolubly linked with the creditor's personality in any 
other way. 
Article 419. Termination of the Obligation with the Liquidation of the Legal 
Entity 
The obligation shall be terminated with the liquidation of the legal entity (the debtor or the creditor), 
with the exception of the cases, when the law or the other legal acts impose the discharge of the 
obligation of the liquidated legal entity upon the other person (by the claims for the compensation of the 
harm, caused to the life or to the health, etc.). 
Subsection 2. The General Provisions on the Contract 
Chapter 27. The Concept and the Terms of the Contract 
Article 420. The Concept of the Contract 
1. The contract shall be recognized as the agreement, concluded by two or by several persons on the 
institution, modification or termination of the civil rights and duties. 
2. Toward the contracts shall be applied the rules on bilateral and multilateral deals, stipulated by 
Chapter 9 of the present Code. 
3. Toward the obligations, arising from the contract, shall be applied the general provisions on 
obligations (Articles 307-419), unless otherwise stipulated by the rules of the present Chapter and the 
rules on the individual kinds of contracts, contained in the present Code. 
4. Toward the contracts, concluded by more than two parties, the general provisions on the contract 
shall be applied, unless this contradicts the multilateral nature of such contracts. 
Article 421. The Freedom of the Contract 
1. The citizens and the legal entities shall be free to conclude contracts. 
Compulsion to conclude contracts shall be inadmissible, with the exception of the cases, when the 
duty to conclude the contract has been stipulated by the present Code, by the law or by a voluntarily 
assumed obligation. 
2. The parties shall have the right to conclude a contract, both stipulated and unstipulated by the law 
or by the other legal acts. 
3. The parties shall have the right to conclude a contract, in which are contained the elements of 
different contracts, stipulated by the law or by the other legal acts (the mixed contract). Toward the 
relationships between the parties in the mixed contract shall be applied in the corresponding parts the 
rules on the contracts, whose elements are contained in the mixed contract, unless otherwise following 
from the agreement between the parties or from the substance of the mixed contract. 
4. The contract terms (provisions) shall be defined at the discretion of the parties, with the exception 
of the cases, when the content of the corresponding term (provision) has been stipulated by the law or by 
the other legal acts (Article 422). 
In the cases, when the contract provision has been stipulated by the norm, applied so far as it has not 
been otherwise stipulated by the agreement between the parties (the dispositive norm), the parties may by 
their own agreement exclude its application, or may introduce the provision, distinct from that, which has 
been stipulated by it. In the absence of such an agreement, the contract provision shall be defined by the 
dispositive norm. 
5. Unless the contract provision has been defined by the parties or by the dispositive norm, the 
corresponding provisions shall be defined by the customs of the business turnover, applicable to the 
relationships between the parties. 
Article 422. The Contract and the Law 
1. The contract shall be obliged to correspond to the rules, obligatory for the parties, which have 
been laid down by the law and by the other legal acts (the imperative norms), operating at the moment of 
its conclusion. 
2. If after the conclusion of the contract the law has been passed, laying down the rules, obligatory 
for the parties, which differ from those in operation when the contract was concluded, the provisions of 
the concluded contract shall stay in force, with the exception of the cases, when the law decrees that its 
action shall be extended to the relationships that have arisen from the contracts, concluded at an earlier 
date. 
Article 423. The Pecuniary and the Gratuitous Contracts 
1. The contract, by which the party shall receive a pay or a different kind of the regress 
remuneration for the discharge of its duties, shall be a pecuniary one. 
2. The contract shall be recognized as gratuitous, if by it one party assumes an obligation to provide 
something to the other party without receiving from it a pay or another kind of the regress remuneration. 
3. The contract shall be supposed to be a pecuniary one, unless otherwise following from the law, 
from the other legal acts, or from the content or the substance of the contract. 
Article 424. The Price 
1. The performance of the contract shall be paid by the price, fixed by an agreement between the 
parties. 
In the law-stipulated cases, the prices (the tariffs, estimates, rates, etc.) shall be applied, fixed or 
regulated by the specially authorized state bodies. 
2. Change in price after the conclusion of the contract shall be admitted in cases and on the terms, 
provided for by the contract, law, or in the procedure established by law. 
3. In the cases, when the price in the pecuniary contract has not been stipulated and cannot be 
defined proceeding from the contract terms, the performance of the contract shall be remunerated by the 
price, which is usually paid under the comparable circumstances for the similar kind of commodities, 
works or services. 
Article 425. The Operation of the Contract 
1. The contract shall come in force and shall become obligatory for the parties from the moment of 
its conclusion. 
2. The parties shall have the right to establish that the terms (provisions) of the contract, concluded 
by them, shall be applied to their relations, which have arisen before the conclusion of the contract. 
3. The law or the contract may stipulate that the end of the term of operation of the contract entails 
the termination of the parties' obligations by the contract. 
The contract, in which such a term is absent, shall be recognized as operating until the moment, 
when the parties complete the performance of the obligation, defined in it. 
4. The expiry of the term of operation of the contract shall not absolve the parties from the 
responsibility for its violation. 
Article 426. The Public Contract 
1. The public contract shall be recognized as a contract, concluded by a commercial organization 
and establishing its duties by the sale of commodities, by the performance of works and by rendering 
services, which such an organization shall effect in conformity with the nature of its activity with respect 
to anybody, who turns to it (in the sphere of the retail trade, the passenger traffic in the public transport 
vehicles, the communications services, the supply of electric energy, the medical services, the hotel 
accommodation, etc.). 
The commercial organization shall have no right to show preference to some persons as compared 
with the others as concerns the conclusion of a public contract, with the exception of the cases, stipulated 
by the law and by the other legal acts. 
2. The price of commodities, works and services, as well as the other terms of the public contract 
shall be equal for all the consumers, with the exception of the cases, when the law and the other legal acts 
admit the granting of privileges for the individual consumer categories. 
3. Refusal on the part of the commercial organization to conclude a public contract, if it can provide 
to the consumer the corresponding commodities and services and to perform for him the corresponding 
works, shall not be admitted. 
If the commercial organization ungroundlessly avoids the conclusion of a public contract, the 
provisions, stipulated by Item 4 of Article 445 of the present Code, shall be applied. 
4. In the law-stipulated cases, the Government of the Russian Federation may issue the rules, 
obligatory for the parties in concluding and performing public contracts (the standard contracts, the 
provisions, etc.). 
5. The terms of the public contract, not corresponding to the requirements, laid down in Items 2 and 
4 of the present Article, shall be insignificant. 
Article 427. The Model Contract Rules 
1. It may be stipulated in the contract that its individual terms are defined by the model terms, 
elaborated for the corresponding type of the contracts and published in the press. 
2. In the case, when the contract contains no reference to the model terms, such model terms shall be 
applied toward the relationships between the parties as the customs of the business turnover, if they 
comply with the requirements, laid down by Article 5 and by Item 5, Article 421 of the present Code. 
3. The model terms may be exposed in the form of a model contract or of another document, 
containing these terms. 
Article 428. The Contract of Affiliation 
1. The contract of affiliation shall be recognized as the contract, whose terms have been defined by 
one of the parties in the official lists or in the other standard forms and could have been accepted by the 
other party only by way of its joining the offered contract as a whole. 
2. The party, which has joined the contract, shall have the right to demand that the contract be 
dissolved or amended, if the contract of affiliation, while not contradicting the law and the other legal 
acts, deprives this party of the rights, which are usually granted by the contracts of the given kind, if it 
excludes or limits the responsibility of the other party for the violation of the obligations or contains the 
other terms, clearly onerous for the affiliated party, which it would have rejected, proceeding from its 
own reasonably interpreted interests, could it have taken part in defining the contract terms. 
3. In the face of the circumstances, stipulated in Item 2 of the present Article, the demand about the 
dissolution or the amendment of the contract, put forward by the party, which has joined the contract in 
connection with the performance of its business activity, shall not be liable to satisfaction, if the affiliated 
party has known, or should have known, on what terms it was concluding the contract. 
Article 429. The Preliminary Contract 
1. By the preliminary contract, the parties shall assume an obligation to conclude in the future a 
contract on the transfer of the property, on the performance of works or on rendering services (the basic 
contract) on the terms, stipulated by the preliminary contract. 
2. The preliminary contract shall be concluded in the form, established for the basic contract, and if 
the form of the basic contract has not been established, in written form. The non-observance of the rules 
on the form of the preliminary contract shall entail its insignificance. 
3. The preliminary contract shall contain the terms, making it possible to identify the object, and 
also the other essential terms of the basic contract. 
4. In the preliminary contract shall be pointed out the term, within which the parties are obliged to 
conclude the basic contract. 
If such term has not been defined in the preliminary contract, the basic contract shall be subject to 
conclusion in the course of one year from the moment of concluding the preliminary contract. 
5. In the cases, when the party, which has concluded the preliminary contract, is avoiding the 
conclusion of the basic contract, shall be applied the provisions, stipulated by Item 4, Article 445 of the 
present Code. 
6. The obligations, stipulated by the preliminary contract, shall be terminated, if before the expiry of 
the term, within which the parties have been obliged to conclude the basic contract, it is not concluded, or 
if one of the parties does not forward to the other party an offer to conclude this contract. 
Article 430. The Contract in Favour of the Third Person 
1. The contract in favour of the third person shall be recognized as a contract, in which the parties 
have laid down that the debtor shall be obliged to discharge the obligation not to the creditor, but to the 
third person, who is, or is not mentioned in the contract and who shall have the right to claim from the 
debtor that he discharge the obligation in his favour. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law, by the other legal acts or by the contract, from the 
moment of the third person expressing to the debtor his intention to avail himself of his right by the 
contract, the parties shall not have the right to dissolve or to amend the contract, concluded by them, 
without the consent of the third person. 
3. The debtor by the contract shall have the right to put forward the objections against the claims of 
the third person, which he could have put forward against the creditor. 
4. In the case, when the third person has renounced the right, granted to him by the contract, the 
creditor may avail himself of this right, unless this contradicts the law, the other legal acts or the contract. 
Article 431. The Interpretation of the Contract 
While interpreting the terms of the contract, the court shall take into account the literal meaning of 
the words and expressions, contained in it. The literal meaning of the terms of the contract in case of its 
being vague shall be identified by way of comparison with the other terms and with the meaning of the 
contract as a whole. 
If the rules, contained in the first part of the present Article, do not make it possible to identify the 
content of the contract, the actual common will of the parties shall be found out with account for the 
purpose of the contract. All the corresponding circumstances, including the negotiations and the 
correspondence, preceding the conclusion of the contract, the habitual practices in the relationships 
between the parties, the customs of the business turnover and the subsequent behaviour of the parties shall 
be taken into account. 
Chapter 28. The Conclusion of the Contract 
Article 432. The Basic Provisions on the Conclusion of a Contract 
1. The contract shall be regarded as concluded, if an agreement has been achieved between the 
parties on all its essential terms, in the form proper for the similar kind of contracts. 
As essential shall be recognized the terms, dealing with the object of the contract, the terms, defined 
as essential or indispensable for the given kind of contracts in the law or in the other legal acts, and also 
all the terms, about which, by the statement of one of the parties, an accord shall be reached. 
2. The contract shall be concluded by way of forwarding the offer (the proposal to conclude the 
contract) by one of the parties and of its acceptance (the acceptance of the offer) by the other party. 
Article 433. The Moment of the Conclusion of the Contract 
1. The contract shall be recognized as concluded at the moment, when the person, who has 
forwarded the offer, has obtained its acceptance. 
2. If in conformity with the law, the transfer of the property is also required for the conclusion of the 
contract, it shall be regarded as concluded from the moment of the transfer of the corresponding property 
(Article 224). 
3. The contract, subject to the state registration, shall be regarded as concluded from the moment of 
its registration, unless otherwise stipulated by the law. 
Article 434. The Form of the Contract 
1. The contract may be concluded in any form, stipulated for making the deals, unless the law 
stipulates a definite form for the given kind of contracts. 
If the parties have agreed to conclude the contract in a definite form, it shall be regarded as 
concluded after the agreed form has been rendered to it, even if the law does not require such form for the 
given kind of contracts. 
2. The contract in written form shall be concluded by compiling one document, signed by the 
parties, and also by way of exchanging the documents by mail, telegraph, teletype, telephone, by the 
electronic or any other type of the means of communication, which makes it possible to establish for 
certain that the document comes from the party by the contract. 
3. The written form of the contract shall be regarded as observed, if the written offer to conclude the 
contract has been accepted in conformity with the order, stipulated by Item 3, Article 438 of the present 
Code. 
See Federal Law No. 1-FZ of January 10, 2002 on Electronic Digital Signature  
Article 435. The Offer 
1. The offer shall be recognized as the proposal, addressed to one or to several concrete persons, 
which is sufficiently comprehensive and which expresses the intention of the person, who has made the 
proposal, to regard himself as having concluded the contract with the addressee, who will accept the 
proposal. 
The offer shall contain the essential terms of the contract. 
2. The offer shall commit the person, who has forwarded it, from the moment of its receipt by the 
addressee. 
If the notification about the recall of the offer comes in before, or simultaneously with the offer, the 
offer shall be regarded as not received. 
Article 436. The Irrevocability of the Offer 
The offer, received by the addressee, shall not be revoked in the course of the term, fixed for its 
acceptance, unless otherwise stipulated in the offer itself or follows from the substance of the proposal, or 
from the setting, in which it has been made. 
Article 437. The Invitation to Make the Offers. The Public Offer 
1. The advertisements and the other proposals, addressed to an indefinite circle of persons, shall be 
regarded as an invitation to make the offers, unless directly pointed out otherwise in the proposal. 
2. The proposal, containing all the essential terms of the contract, in which is seen the will of the 
person, who is making the proposal, to conclude the contract on the terms, indicated in the proposal, with 
any responding person, shall be recognized as an offer (the public offer). 
Article 438. The Acceptance 
1. The acceptance shall be recognized as the response of the person, to whom the offer has been 
addressed, about its being accepted. 
The acceptance shall be full and unconditional. 
2. The silence shall not be regarded as the acceptance, unless otherwise following from the law, 
from the custom of the business turnover, or from the former business relations between the parties. 
3. The performance by the person, who has received an offer, of the actions, involved in complying 
with the terms of the contract, pointed out in the offer (the dispatch of commodities, the rendering of 
services, the performance of works, the payment of the corresponding amount of money, etc.), shall be 
regarded as the acceptance, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the other legal acts, or pointed 
out in the offer. 
Article 439. Recall of the Offer 
If the notification about the recall of the offer has come to the person, who has forwarded the offer, 
before the acceptance or simultaneously with it, the acceptance shall be regarded as not obtained. 
Article 440. Conclusion of the Contract on the Ground of the Offer, Fixing the 
Term of Acceptance 
When the term of acceptance has been fixed in the offer, the contract shall be regarded as 
concluded, if the acceptance has been obtained by the person, who has forwarded the offer, within the 
term, stipulated in it. 
Article 441. Conclusion of the Contract on the Ground of the Offer, Not Fixing 
the Term of Acceptance 
1. When in the written offer no term of acceptance has been stipulated, the contract shall be 
regarded as concluded, if the acceptance has been obtained by the person, who has forwarded the offer, 
before the expiry of the term, fixed by the law or by the other legal acts, and if such term has not been 
fixed - in the course of the normally required time. 
2. When the offer has been made orally and no term of acceptance has been indicated, the contract 
shall be regarded as concluded, if the other party immediately declared its acceptance. 
Article 442. The Acceptance, Obtained with a Delay 
In the cases, when the duly forwarded notification about the acceptance is received with a delay, the 
acceptance shall not be regarded as belated, unless the party, which has forwarded the offer, immediately 
notifies the other party about the arrival of the acceptance with a delay. 
If the party, which has forwarded the offer, immediately notifies the other party about the obtaining 
of its acceptance, which has come in with a delay, the contract shall be regarded as concluded. 
Article 443. The Acceptance on the Other Terms 
The answer, indicating the consent to conclude the contract on the terms other than those indicated 
in the offer, shall not be regarded as the acceptance. 
offer. 
Such an answer shall be recognized as the refusal of the acceptance and at the same time as a new 
Article 444. The Place of the Conclusion of the Contract 
If no place of its conclusion has been indicated in the contract, it shall be recognized as concluded at 
the place of residence of the citizen or at the place of location of the legal entity, who (which) has 
forwarded the offer. 
Article 445. The Obligatory Conclusion of the Contract 
1. In the cases, when in conformity with the present Code or with the other laws, the conclusion of 
the contract is obligatory for the party, to which the offer (the draft contract) has been forwarded, this 
party shall forward to the other party the notification about the acceptance, or about the refusal of the 
acceptance, or about the acceptance of the offer on different terms (the records on the differences by the 
draft contract) within 30 days from the date, when the offer was received. 
The party, which has forwarded the offer and which has received from the party, for which the 
conclusion of the contract is obligatory, the notification about its acceptance on different terms (the 
records on the differences by the draft contract), shall have the right to pass the differences, which have 
arisen during the conclusion of the contract, for consideration to the court within 30 days from the day of 
receiving such a notification or from the day of the expiry of the term of acceptance. 
2. In the cases, when in conformity with the present Code or with the other legal acts, the conclusion 
of the contract is obligatory for the party, which has forwarded the offer (the draft contract), and when 
within 30 days the records on the differences by the draft contract are forwarded to it, this party shall be 
obliged to notify the other party, within 30 days from the receipt of the records on the differences, about 
the acceptance of the contract in its own version, or about the rejection of the records on the differences. 
In the case of the records on the differences being rejected, or of the non-receipt of the notification 
about the results of their examination within the stipulated term, the party, which has forwarded the 
records of the differences, shall have the right to pass the differences that have arisen during the 
conclusion of the contract, for consideration to the court. 
3. The rules on the term, stipulated by Items 1 and 2 of the present Article, shall be applied, unless 
the other term has been stipulated by the law or by the other legal acts, or has been agreed upon between 
the parties. 
4. If the party, for which, in conformity with the present Code or with the other laws, the conclusion 
of the contract is obligatory, avoids its conclusion, the other party shall have the right to turn to the court 
with a claim for compelling it to conclude the contract. 
The party, groundlessly avoiding the conclusion of the contract, shall be obliged to recompense to 
the other party the losses, thus inflicted upon it. 
Article 446. The Pre-Contract Disputes 
In the cases, when the differences, arising during the conclusion of the contract, are passed for 
consideration to the court on the ground of Article 445 of the present Code or by an agreement between 
the parties, the terms of the contract, by which the parties have displayed differences, shall be defined in 
conformity with the court decision. 
Article 447. Conclusion of the Contract by a Tender 
1. The contract, unless otherwise following from its substance, shall be concluded by way of 
holding a tender. In this case, the contract shall be concluded with the person, who has won it. 
2. In the capacity of the organizer of the tender shall come out the owner of the thing, or the 
possessor of the right of ownership, or a specialized organization. The latter shall act on the ground of the 
contract with the owner of the thing or with the possessor of the right of ownership, and shall come out on 
their behalf or on its own behalf. 
3. In the cases, pointed out in the present Code or in the other law, the contracts on the sale of the 
thing or of the right of ownership may be concluded only by way of holding a sale. 
4. The sale shall be held in the form of an auction or of a tender. 
The winner of the bidding at an auction shall be recognized as the person, who has offered the 
highest price, and at the tender - the person, who, as has been concluded by the tender commission, 
appointed in advance by the organizer of the tender, has offered the best terms. 
The form of the bidding shall be defined by the owner of the thing on sale or by the possessor of the 
realized right of ownership, unless otherwise stipulated by the law. 
5. The auction and the tender, in which only one customer has participated, shall be recognized as 
having failed. 
6. The rules, stipulated by Articles 448 and 449 of the present Code, shall be applied to the public 
auctions, held by way of execution of the court ruling, unless otherwise stipulated by the procedural 
legislation. 
Article 448. The Organization and the Order of Holding the Sales 
1. The auctions and tenders shall be open and closed. 
In an open auction and in an open tender anybody may take part. In a closed auction and in a closed 
tender only the persons, specially invited for this purpose, shall take part. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law, the statement on the holding of the sale shall be made by 
its organizer not later than 30 days in advance. The statement shall in any case contain information on the 
time, the place and the form of the sale, on its object and procedure, including that involved in 
formalizing the participation in the sale, in the way of determining the winner in the bidding, and shall 
also name the starting price. 
If the object of the bidding is only the right to conclude a contract, the statement on the forthcoming 
auction shall contain the indication of the term, granted for this. 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or by the statement on the holding of the sale, the 
organizer of an open auction, who has made the statement, shall have the right to refuse to hold the 
auction at any time, but not later than three days before the date of its holding, and in the case of the 
tender - not later than 30 days before its holding. 
In the cases, when the organizer of the open sale has refused to hold it with the violation of the fixed 
term, he shall be obliged to recompense to the participants the actual losses they have suffered. 
The organizer of the closed auction or of a closed tender shall be obliged to recompense to the 
invited participants their actual losses, regardless of fact, on what particular date after forwarding to them 
the notification the refusal to hold it followed. 
4. The participants in the sale shall put in an advance in the amount, within the term and in 
conformity with the order, which have been pointed out in the notification about the holding of the sale. 
In case it has not taken place, the advance shall be liable to return. The advance shall also be returned to 
the persons, who, while having taken part in the bidding, have not won it. 
When concluding the contract with the person, who has won the bidding, the amount of the advance 
put in by him shall be offset against the discharge of obligations by the concluded contract. 
5. The person, who has won the sale, and its organizer shall sign the records on the results of the 
bidding, which shall possess the power of a contract, on the day of the bidding. The winner of the sale 
shall lose the advance, put in by him, in case he tries to avoid the signing of the records. The organizer of 
the sale, who has avoided the signing of the records, shall be obliged to return the advance in the double 
amount, and also to recompense to the winner of the sale his losses, involved in his taking part in the 
bidding, in the part, exceeding the amount of the advance. 
If the object of the sale has been only the right to conclude a contract, such a contract shall be signed 
by the parties not later than within 20 days, or within another term, pointed out in the notification, after 
the end of the bidding and the formalization of the records. In case of one of the parties avoiding the 
signing of the contract, the other party shall have the right to file a claim with the court for a compulsory 
conclusion of the contract, and also for the compensation of the losses, caused by such an attempt to 
avoid its conclusion. 
Article 449. The Consequences of Violation of the Rules for Holding the Sale 
1. The sale, held with the violation of the rules, laid down by the law, may be recognized by the 
court as invalid upon the claim of the interested persons. 
2. The recognizing of the bidding to be invalid shall entail the invalidity of the contract, concluded 
with the person, who has won it. 
Chapter 29. The Amendment and the Cancellation of the Contract 
Article 450. The Grounds for the Amendment and the Cancellation of the 
Contract 
1. The amendment and the cancellation of the contract shall be possible only by an agreement 
between the parties, unless otherwise stipulated by the present Code, by the other legal acts or by the 
contract. 
2. Upon the demand of one of the parties, the contract may be amended or cancelled by the court 
decision only: 
1) in case of an essential violation of the contract by the other party; 
2) in the other cases, stipulated by the present Code, by the other legal acts or by the contract. 
As an essential violation shall be recognized such violation of the contract by one of the parties, 
which entails for the other party the losses, to a considerable extent depriving it of what it could have 
counted upon when concluding the contract. 
3. In case of the unilateral refusal to discharge the contract in full or in part, when such refusal is 
admitted by the law or by the agreement between the parties, the contract shall be correspondingly 
regarded as cancelled or as amended. 
On the additional grounds for amendment and cancellation of the contract see Federal Law No. 6-FZ 
of January 8, 1998  
Article 451. The Amendment and the Cancellation of the Contract Because of 
an Essential Change of Circumstances 
1. An essential change of the circumstances, from which the parties have proceeded when 
concluding the contract, shall be the ground for its amendment or cancellation, unless otherwise stipulated 
by the contract or following from its substance. 
The change of the circumstances shall be recognized as essential, if they have changed to such an 
extent that in case the parties could have wisely envisaged it, the contract would not have been concluded 
by them or would have been concluded on the essentially different terms. 
2. If the parties have failed to reach an agreement on bringing the contract into correspondence with 
the essentially changed circumstances or on its cancellation, the contract may be cancelled, and on the 
grounds, stipulated by Item 4 of the present Article, it may be amended by the court upon the claim of the 
interested party in the face of the simultaneous existence of the following conditions: 
1) at the moment of concluding the contract, the parties have proceeded from the fact that no such 
change of the circumstances will take place; 
2) the change of the circumstances has been called forth by the causes, which the interested party 
could not overcome after they have arisen, while displaying the degree of care and circumspection, which 
have been expected from it by the nature of the contract and by the terms of the circulation; 
3) the execution of the contract without amending its provisions would so much upset the balance of 
the property interests of the parties, corresponding to the contract, and would entail such a loss for the 
interested party that it would have been to a considerable extent deprived of what it could have counted 
upon when concluding the contract; 
4) neither from the customs of the business turnover, nor from the substance of the contract does it 
follow that the risk, involved in the change of the circumstances, shall be borne by the interested party. 
3. In case of the cancellation of the contract because of the essentially changed circumstances, the 
court shall, upon the claim of any one of the parties, define the consequences of the cancellation of the 
contract, proceeding from the need to justly distribute the expenses, borne by them in connection with the 
execution of this contract, between the parties. 
4. The amendment of the contract in connection with an essential change of the circumstances shall 
be admitted by the court decision in extraordinary cases, when the cancellation of the contract contradicts 
the public interests, or if it entails the losses for the parties, considerably exceeding the expenses, 
necessary for the execution of the contract on the terms, amended by the court. 
Article 452. The Procedure for the Amendment and the Cancellation of the 
Contract 
1. The agreement on the amendment or on the cancellation of the contract shall be legalized in the 
same form as the contract itself, unless otherwise following from the law, from the other legal acts, from 
the contract or from the customs of the business turnover. 
2. The claim for the amendment or for the cancellation of the contract may be filed by the party with 
the court only after it has received the refusal from the other party in response to its proposal to amend or 
to cancel the contract, or in case of its non-receipt of any response within the term, indicated in the 
proposal or fixed by the law or by the contract, and in the absence thereof - within a 30-day term. 
Article 453. The Consequences of the Amendment and of the Cancellation of 
the Contract 
1. In case of the amendment of the contract, the parties' obligations shall be preserved in the 
amended form. 
2. In case of the cancellation of the contract, the parties' obligations shall be terminated. 
3. In case of the amendment or of the cancellation of the contract, the obligations shall be regarded 
as amended or as terminated from the moment of the parties' concluding an agreement on the amendment 
or on the cancellation of the contract, unless otherwise following from the agreement or from the nature 
of the contract's amendment, and in case of the amendment or the cancellation of the contract by the court 
decision - from the moment of the enforcement of the court ruling on the amendment or on the 
cancellation of the contract. 
4. The parties shall have no right to claim the return of what has been discharged by them by their 
obligations up to the moment of the amendment or the cancellation of the contract, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the law or by the agreement between the parties. 
5. If an essential violation of the contract by one of the parties has served as the ground for the 
amendment or for the cancellation of the contract, the other party shall have the right to claim the 
compensation of the losses, inflicted upon it by the amendment or by the cancellation of the contract. 
Part Two 
In keeping with the Federal Law No. 15-FZ of January 26, 1996 Part Two of the present Code was put 
into force from March 1, 1996 
On Part Two of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation see Letter of the Higher Arbitration Court of 
the Russian Federation No. S1-7/OZ-47 of January 31, 1996  
Section IV. Particular Kinds of Obligations 
Chapter 30. Purchase and Sale 
_ 1. General Provisions on Purchase and Sale 
Article 454. Contract of Sale 
1. By contract of sale one party (the seller) shall undertake to convey a thing (commodity) to the 
ownership of the other party (buyer), while the buyer shall undertake to accept this commodity and pay a 
definite amount of money (price) therefor. 
2. Provisions stipulated by this paragraph shall be applied to the purchase and sale of securities and 
currency values unless the law establishes special rules for their purchase and sale. 
3. In cases provided for by this Code or any other law the specific aspects of purchase and sale of 
particular goods shall be determined by laws and other legal acts. 
On certain kinds of purchase and sale contracts also see: 
Law of February 7, 1992 on Protection of the Consumers' Rights in the wording of January 9, 1996 
The United Nations Convention on Agreements on International Sale and Purchase of Goods of April 
11, 1980  
4. Provisions stipulated by this paragraph shall be applicable to the sale of property rights, unless the 
contrary follows from the content or nature of these rights. 
5. Provisions specified by this paragraph shall be applicable to particular kinds of the contract of 
sale (retail sale, delivery of goods, delivery of goods for state needs, contracting, power supply, sale of 
real estate, sale of an enterprise), unless the contrary is provided for by the rules of this Code for these 
kinds of contracts. 
Article 455. The Condition of the Contract about Goods 
1. Any things may be goods under the contract of sale due to the observance of the rules envisaged 
by Article 129 of this Code. 
2. A contract may be concluded for the sale of goods to be on hand by the seller at the time of its 
conclusion, and also of goods which will be created or acquired by the seller in the future, unless 
otherwise stipulated by law or follows from the nature of goods. 
3. The condition of the contract of sale shall be deemed to be agreed upon, if the contract makes it 
possible to determine the name and quantity of goods. 
Article 456. The Duties of the Seller for the Transfer of Goods 
1. The seller shall be obliged to transfer to the buyer goods provided for by the contract of sale. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale, the seller shall be obliged to transfer together 
with the thing its accessories, and also documents related to it (technical certificate, quality certificate, 
operations instructions, etc.), envisaged by law, other legal acts or contracts. 
Article 457. The Term of the Execution of the Duty to Transfer Goods 
1. The term of the execution of the seller's duty to turn over goods to the buyer shall be determined 
by the contract of sale, and if the contract does not allow to determine this term, the term of the execution 
of this duty of the seller shall be determined by the rules stipulated by Article 314 of this Code. 
2. The contract of sale shall be deemed to be concluded with the proviso of its performance by the 
strictly fixed date, if it follows succinctly from the contract that in case of breaking the term of its 
execution the buyer loses his interest in the contract. 
The seller shall have the right to perform such contract before the onset or after the expiry of the 
term fixed by it only with the buyer's consent. 
Article 458. The Time of the Discharge of the Seller's Duty to Hand over Goods 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale, the duty of the seller to hand over goods to the 
buyer shall be deemed to be exercised at the time of: 
the delivery of goods to the buyer or the person indicated by him, if the contract provides for the 
seller's duty to deliver goods; 
the placement of goods at the disposal of the buyer, if goods should be passed to the buyer or the 
person indicated by him in the place of location of goods. Goods shall be deemed to be placed at the 
buyer's disposal, when by the time specified by the contract goods are ready for the transfer in the proper 
place and the buyer is aware of the readiness of goods for such transfer in accordance with the contract's 
conditions. Goods shall not be deemed to be ready for transfer, if they have not been identified for the 
contract's purposes by marking or in any other way. 
2. In cases when the contract of sale does not imply the seller's duty to deliver goods or turn them 
over to the buyer at the place of their location, the duty of the seller to turn them over the buyer shall be 
deemed to be performed at the time of handing over goods to the carrier or the communication 
organization for the delivery to the buyer, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
Article 459. The Transfer of the Risk of Accidental Destruction of Goods 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale, the risk of accidental destruction of goods or 
accidental damage of goods shall be transferred to the buyer since the time when in keeping with law or 
the contract the seller is deemed to have performed his duty of handing over goods to the buyer. 
2. The risk of accidental destruction of, or accidental damage to, goods sold when they are in transit 
shall be transferred to the buyer since the time of concluding the contract of sale, unless otherwise 
stipulated by such contract or the customs of business turnover. 
The condition of the contract to the effect that the risk of accidental destruction of, or accidental 
damage to, goods is transferred to the buyer since the time of the delivery of goods to the first carrier may 
be recognized by a court of law as invalid on the demand of the buyer, if at the time of concluding the 
contract the seller knew or should known that the goods had been lost or damaged and failed to inform the 
buyer about this. 
Article 460. The Duty of the Seller to Hand Over Goods Free from the Rights of 
Third Persons 
1. The seller shall be obliged to give to the buyer goods free from any rights of third persons with 
the exception of the case when the buyer has agreed to accept goods encumbered with the rights of third 
persons. 
The seller's failure to discharge this duty shall entitle the buyer to demand a reduction of the price of 
goods or to cancel the contract of sale, if it is not proved that the buyer knew or should have known about 
the rights of third persons to these goods. 
2. The rules, provided for by Item 1 of this Article, shall be applicable in that case as well when to 
the goods by the time of their transfer there had been claims from third persons, about which the seller 
had information if these claims were subsequently recognized as lawful in the established order. 
Article 461. The Liability of the Seller in Case of the Withdrawal of Goods 
from the Buyer 
1. If goods are withdrawal from the buyer by third persons on the grounds that arose before the 
execution of the contract of sale, the seller shall be obliged to compensate the buyer's losses, unless he 
proves that the buyer knew or should have known about these grounds. 
2. The agreement of the parties thereto about the release of the buyer of the liability in case third 
persons reclaim the acquired goods from the buyer or about its restriction shall be null and void. 
Article 462. The Duties of the Buyer and the Seller in Case of Bringing an 
Action About the Withdrawal of Goods 
If a third party brings an action for the withdrawal of goods on the ground that arose before the 
execution of the contract of sale, the buyer shall be obliged to draw the seller to the participation in the 
case, whereas the seller shall be obliged to join this case on the side of the buyer. 
The non-engagement by the buyer of the seller in the participation in the case shall absolve the seller 
from his liability to the buyer, if the seller proves that by taking part in the case he could prevent the 
withdrawal of sold goods from the buyer. 
The seller who was involved by the buyer in the case but who failed to take part in it shall be 
deprived of the right to prove that the buyer conducted the case incorrectly. 
Article 463. The Consequences of the Non-execution of the Duty to Hand Over 
Goods 
1. If the seller refuses to give to the buyer the sold goods, the buyer shall have the right to waive the 
execution of the contract of sale. 
2. If the seller refuses to give an individually definite thing, the buyer shall have the right to lay 
claims to the seller, provided for by Article 398 of this Code. 
Article 464. The Consequences of the Non-execution of the Duty to Pass 
Accessories and Documents Relating to Goods 
If the seller fails to pass or refuses to pass to the buyer accessories or documents relating to goods, 
which he should give in keeping with law, other legal acts or with the contract of sale (Item 2 of Article 
456), the buyer shall have the right to fix the reasonable period of time for their transfer. 
In case when the accessories and documents relating to goods have not been given by the seller in 
the said period of time, the buyer shall have the right to waive goods, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
contract. 
Article 465. The Quantity of Goods 
1. The quantity if goods subject to the transfer to the buyer shall be provided for by the contract of 
sale in corresponding units of measurement or in money terms. The condition of the quantity of goods 
may be agreed upon by fixing in the contract the order of its estimation. 
2. If the contract of sale does not make it possible to estimate the quantity of goods subject to 
transfer, the contract shall not be deemed to be concluded. 
Article 466. The Consequences of the Breach of the Condition for the Quantity 
of Goods 
1. If the seller has passed to the buyer in breach of the contract of sale the less or quantity of goods 
than that specified in the contract, the buyer shall have the right to demand the missing quantity of goods 
or to waive the given goods and the payment for them, but the goods have been paid for, to demand the 
return of the paid sum of money. 
2. If the seller has passed to the buyer goods in the quantity exceeding that specified in the contract 
of sale, the buyer shall be obliged to inform the seller about this in the procedure, provided for by Item 1 
of Article 483 of this Code. If the seller has failed to dispose of the corresponding part of goods within the 
reasonable period of time, after the receipt of the buyer's information, the buyer shall have the right to 
accept all the goods, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
3. If the buyer accepts goods in the quantity exceeding that indicated in the contract of sale (Item 2 
of this Article), the additionally accepted goods shall be paid for at the price specified for the goods 
accepted in conformity with the contract, unless the agreement between the parties thereto has fixed a 
different price. 
Article 467. Assortment of Goods 
1. If under the contract of sale goods are subject to transfer in a definite correlation according to 
kinds, models, size, colour and other properties (assortment), the seller shall be obliged to transfer goods 
in the assortment agreed upon by the parties thereto. 
2. If assortment has not been determined in the contract of sale and the latter has not established the 
procedure for its definition, but it follows from the substance of the obligation that goods should be 
transferred to the buyer in assortment on the basis of the buyer's needs which were known to the seller at 
the time of concluding the contract or to refuse to execute this contract. 
Article 468. The Consequences of Breaking the Condition of Goods Assortment 
1. In case of the transfer of goods, stipulated by the contract of sale, in assortment inconsistent with 
the contract, the buyer shall have the right to refuse to accept them and pay for them, but if they have 
been paid for, to demand the return of the paid sum of money. 
2. If alongside with goods whose assortment corresponds to the contract of sale the seller has given 
to the buyer goods with the breach of the assortment condition, the buyer shall have the right: 
to accept goods fitting with the assortment condition and to refuse to accept the rest of them; 
to waive all the given goods; 
to demand that goods which are at variance with the assortment condition should be replaced by 
goods in the assortment stipulated by the contract; 
to accept all the given goods. 
3. In case of the refusal from the goods whose assortment differs from the condition of the contract 
of sale or in case of making a claim for the replacement of goods inconsistent with the assortment 
condition, the buyer shall have the right to refuse to pay for these goods, but if they have been paid for, to 
demand the refund of the paid sum of money. 
4. Goods running at variance with the assortment condition of the contract of sale shall be deemed 
to be accepted, unless the buyer informs the seller about his refusal to take goods within the reasonable 
period after their receipt. 
5. If the buyer has not refused to accept goods whose assortment runs counter to the contract of sale, 
he shall be obliged to pay for them at the price agreed upon with the seller. In case where the seller has 
not taken the necessary measures of adjusting the price within the reasonable period, the buyer shall pay 
for goods at the price which at the time of concluding a contract under comparable circumstances has 
been usually charged for similar goods. 
6. The rules of this Article shall be applied, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale. 
Article 469. The Quality of Goods 
On the quality of sold goods also see the Law of the Russian Federation of February 7, 1992 on the 
Protection of Consumers' Rights in wording of January 9, 1996 
1. The seller shall be obliged to transfer to the buyer goods whose quality corresponds to the 
contract of sale. 
2. In the absence of quality terms in the contract of sale the seller shall be obliged to hand over to 
the customs goods suitable for the purposes for which goods of this sort are usually used. 
If the seller was informed by the buyer about the concrete purposes of the acquisition of goods 
during the conclusion of the relevant contract, the seller shall be obliged to transfer to the buyer goods 
suitable for use in conformity with these purposes. 
3. In case goods are sold according to sample and/or description the seller shall be obliged to hand 
over goods which correspond to the sample and/or their description. 
Federal Law No. 213-FZ of December 17, 1999 amended Item 4 of Article 469 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
4. If by a law or in a procedure established by a law for mandatory requirements for the quality of 
saleable goods, the seller engaged in business shall be obliged to transfer to the buyer goods which meet 
these mandatory requirements. 
Under the agreement between the seller and the buyer the former may hand over to the latter goods 
meeting the higher requirements for quality as compared with the mandatory requirements stipulated by a 
law or in a procedure established by a law. 
Article 470. The Guarantee of the Quality of Goods 
1. Goods which the seller is obliged to hand over to the buyer shall correspond to the requirements, 
stipulated by Article 469 of this Code, at the time of their transfer to the buyer, unless the contract of sale 
provides for a different time of defining the compliance of goods with these requirements and within the 
reasonable period goods shall be suitable for the purposes for which goods of this sort are usually used. 
2. In case where the contract of sale provides for the submission by the seller of the guarantee of the 
quality of goods, the seller shall be obliged to transfer to the buyer goods which should meet the 
requirements, stipulated by Article 469 of this Code, during the time fixed by the contract (guarantee 
period). 
3. The guarantee of the quality of goods shall also extend to all the complementary parts, unless 
otherwise provided for by the contract of sale. 
Article 471. The Reckoning of the Guarantee Period 
On Fixing the Service Life or the Working Life of Goods (Works), and also the Guarantee Period of 
Goods (Works) see the Law of the Russian Federation on the Protection of the Consumers' Rights in 
wording of January 9, 1996 
1. The guarantee period shall start to run since the time of transfer of goods to the buyer (Article 
457), unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale. 
2. If the buyer is deprived of the possibility to use goods, for which the contract has provided the 
guarantee period, due to the circumstances under the control of the seller, the guarantee period shall not 
run until the removal of relevant circumstances by the seller. 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale, the guarantee period shall be prolonged for the 
time during which goods could not be used because of the discovered shortcomings, provide the seller is 
informed about the defects of goods in the order established by Article 483 of this Code. 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale, the warranty period for complementary parts 
shall be deemed to be equal to the guarantee period for the basic item and shall begin to run 
simultaneously with the guarantee period for the basic item. 
4. A guarantee period shall be established for goods (complementary parts), in which defects 
(Article 476) have been discovered during the guarantee period. This guarantee period shall be of the 
same duration that applies to the replaced goods, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale. 
Federal Law No. 213-FZ of December 17, 1999 amended Article 472 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 472. The Serviceable Life of Goods 
1. By a law or in a procedure established by a law there may be stipulated the obligation to 
determine the period of time at the expiration of which the goods are considered unsuitable for use for 
their regular purpose (period of suitability). 
The List of Goods Which upon the Expiry of the Application Time Shall Be Deemed to Be Unfit to Be 
Used for Their Proper Purpose was approved by the Decision of the Government of the Russian 
Federation No. 720 of June 16, 1997 
2. Goods for which the serviceable life has been fixed shall be transferred by the seller to the buyer 
with all allowance for their use by designation before the expiry of the serviceable life, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the agreement. 
Article 473. The Reckoning of the Serviceable Life of Goods 
Also see the Law of the Russian Federation on the Protection of Consumers' Rights in wording of 
January 9, 1996 
The serviceable life of goods shall be determined by the period of time, calculated since the day of 
their manufacture, during which goods are fit for use, or by the date before which goods are fit for use. 
Article 474. Quality Inspection 
1. Quality inspection may be provided for by the law, other legal acts and the mandatory 
requirements of state standards or by the contract of sale. 
Procedure for quality inspection shall be introduced by the law, other legal acts, the mandatory 
requirements of state standards or by the contract. In cases there inspection procedure is established by 
the law, other legal acts and the mandatory requirements of state standards, the procedure of quality 
inspection of goods, determined by the contract, shall comply with these requirements. 
2. If procedure for quality inspection is not introduced in keeping with Item 1 of this Article, the 
inspection of the quality of goods shall be carried out in accordance with the customs of the volume of 
business or with other commonly used terms of the quality inspection of goods subject to transfer under 
the contract of sale. 
3. If the law, other legal acts, the mandatory requirements of state standards or the contract of sale 
provide for the duty of the seller to inspect the quality of goods to be transferred to the buyer (testing, 
analysis, inspection, etc.), the seller shall present to the buyer proof of quality inspection. 
4. Procedure, and also other terms of the quality inspection of goods, carried out both by the seller 
and the buyer, shall be the same. 
Article 475. The Consequences of the Transfer of Goods of Improper Quality 
1. Unless defects of goods were specified by the seller, the buyer to whom substandard goods have 
been handed over shall have the right to demand from the seller at his option: - a proportionate reduction in the purchase price; - gratuitous removal of defects in goods within the reasonable period of time; - compensation of his expenses incurred in the removal of the defects of goods. 
2. If the requirements for the quality of goods have been breached substantially (discovery of 
irremovable defects, defects which cannot be removed without disproportionate costs or costs of time, 
recurrent defects or newly emerged defects after their removal, and of other similar shortcomings), the 
buyer shall have the right to act at his option: 
to refuse to fulfil the contract of sale and to demand the sum of money paid for the goods; 
to demand the substitution of proper goods corresponding to the contract for the goods of improper 
quality. 
3. Claims for the removal of defects or for the substitution of goods, referred to in Items 1 and 2 of 
this Article, may be made by the buyer, unless the contrary follows from the nature of goods or the 
substance of the obligation. 
4. In the event of the improper quality of some part of goods that make up the set (Article 479) the 
buyer shall have the right to exercise, in respect of this part of goods, the rights, envisaged by Items 1 and 
2 of this Article. 
5. The rules, provided for by this Article, shall be applicable, unless the present Code or any other 
law establishes the contrary. 
On Consequences of the Sale of Goods of Improper Quality also see Law of the Russian Federation on 
the Protection of Consumers' Rights in wording of January 9, 1996 
Article 476. Defects of Goods for Which the Seller Is Responsible 
1. The seller shall be responsible for the defects of goods, if the buyer proves that they had arisen 
before they were transferred to him or for the reasons that emerged before this occurrence. 
2. The seller shall bear responsibility for the defects of the goods to which he accorded the 
guarantee of quality, unless he proves that these defects arose after the goods had been handed over the 
buyer in consequence of the breach by the buyer of the rules of using goods or of their storage, or in 
consequence of the actions of third persons or force majeure. 
Article 477. Time-limits of Discovery of Defects in Transferred Goods 
On time-limits of making claims associated with defects of sold goods also see Law of the Russian 
Federation of February 7, 1992 on the Protection of Consumers' Rights in wording of January 9, 1996 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the contract of sale, the buyer shall have the right to 
make claims associated with defects of goods, provided they have been discovered in the time-limits 
fixed by this Article. 
2. If no guarantee period or serviceable life is established for goods claims for defects in goods may 
be made by the buyer, provided that the defects of goods sold have been discovered in the reasonable 
period of time, but within two years since the day of transfer of goods to the buyer or within the longer 
period of time, when it is fixed by the law or the contract of sale. The time-limit for the discovery of 
shortcomings in goods subject to carriage or dispatch by post shall be reckoned since the day of the 
delivery of goods to the place of their destination. 
3. If a guarantee period has been fixed for goods, the buyer shall have the right to make claims 
associated with defects of goods upon the discovery of defects during the guarantee period. 
If a warranty period has been fixed for complementary parts in the contract of sale of lesser duration 
than for the basic unit, the buyer shall have the right to make claims for the defects in a complementary 
part upon their discovery during the guarantee period for the basic unit. 
If a guarantee period is fixed for a complementary part in the contract for longer duration than the 
guarantee period for the basic unit, the buyer shall have the right to make claims for defects of goods, if 
defects of the complementary part have been discovered during its guarantee period, regardless of the 
expiry of the guarantee period for the basic unit. 
4. The buyer shall have the right to make claims for the defects of goods with serviceable life, if 
they have been discovered during their serviceable life. 
5. In cases where the guarantee period stipulated by the contract makes up less than two years and 
defects in goods were discovered by the buyer upon the expiry of the guarantee period, but within two 
years since the day of the transfer of goods to the buyer, the seller shall bear responsibility, if the buyer 
proves that the defects of goods arose before they had been handed over to the buyer or for the reasons 
that emerged before this occurrence. 
Article 478. Complete Sets of Goods 
1. The seller shall be obliged to hand over to the buyer goods corresponding to the terms of the 
contract of sale on completeness. 
2. If the contract of sale has not defined the complete set of goods, the seller shall be obliged to hand 
over to the buyer goods whose completeness is determined by the customs of the volume of business or 
by other usually made claims. 
Article 479. A Set of Goods 
1. If the contract of sale provides for the duty of the seller to hand over to the buyer a definite set of 
goods, the obligation shall be deemed to be fulfilled since the time of the transfer of all goods included in 
the set. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale and unless the contrary follows from the 
substance of the obligation concerned, the seller shall be obliged to transfer at once to the buyer all the 
goods included in the set. 
Article 480. The Consequences of the Transfer of Incomplete Sets of Goods 
1. If an incomplete set of goods is transferred (Article 478), the buyer shall have the right to demand 
from the seller at his option: - a proportionate reduction of the purchase price; - the completing of goods within the reasonable period of time. 
2. If the seller has failed to fulfil the claims of the buyer for completing goods within the reasonable 
period of time, the buyer shall have the right at his option: 
to demand the substitution of complete goods for incomplete goods; 
to waive the execution of the contract of sale and demand the refund of the paid sum of money. 
3. The consequences, envisaged by Items 1 and 2 of this Article, shall also be applied in case of the 
breach by the seller of his duty to hand over to the buyer a set of goods (Article 479), unless otherwise 
stipulated by the contract of sale and unless the contrary follows from the substance of the obligation. 
Article 481. Tare and Packaging 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale and unless the contrary follows from the 
substance of the obligation, the seller shall be obliged to hand over goods in tare and/or in packaging, 
except for goods which do not require tare and/or packaging in view of their character. 
2. If the contract of sale has not determined the requirements for tare and packaging, goods shall be 
bagged and/or packaged by the usual method, and in the absence of such method by the method that 
ensures the safety of goods of such kind under the usual conditions of storage and transportation. 
3. If the statutory order provides for mandatory requirements for tare and/or packaging, the seller 
engaged in business shall be obliged to hand over goods to the buyer in tare and/or in packaging meeting 
these mandatory requirements. 
Article 482. The Consequences of the Transfer of Goods Without Tare and/or 
Packaging or in Improper Tare and/or Packaging 
1. In cases where goods subject to bagging and/or packaging are handed over to the buyer without 
tare and/or packaging, the buyer shall have the right to demand that the seller should bag and/or pack 
goods or to replace improper tare and/or packaging, unless the contrary follows from the contract, the 
substance of the obligation or the nature of goods. 
2. In cases, provided for by Item 1 of this Article, the buyer shall have the right to make to the seller 
claims following from the transfer of goods of improper quality (Article 475) instead of the claims, 
referred to in this Item. 
Article 483. The Notification of the Seller about the Improper Execution of the 
Contract of Sale 
1. The buyer shall be obliged to inform the seller about the breach of the term of the contract of sale 
on the quantity, assortment, quality, completeness, tare and/or package of goods within the period 
provided for by the law, other legal acts or the contract, and if such period has not been fixed, within the 
reasonable period after the breach of the corresponding term of the contract should have been discovered 
by proceeding from the character and designation of goods. 
2. In case of non-fulfilment of the rule, envisaged by Item 1 of this Article, the seller shall have the 
right to refuse in full or in part from the satisfaction of the claims of the buyer on the transfer to him of 
the missing quantity of goods, on the replacement of goods that do not meet the terms of the contract of 
sale, on the quality and assortment of goods, on the removal of defects of goods, on completing goods or 
on the substitution of complete goods for incomplete goods, on the bagging and/or packing of goods or on 
the replacement of substandard tare and/or packaging of goods, if he proves that the non-fulfilment of his 
rule by the buyer has involved the impossibility of satisfying his claims or entails for the seller the 
incommensurable expenses as compared with those he would have incurred, has he been informed in due 
time about the breach of the contract. 
3. If the seller knew or should known about the fact that the transferred goods did not correspond to 
the terms of the contract of sale, he shall not have the right to refer to the provisions, stipulated by Items 1 
and 2 of this Article. 
Article 484. The Duty of the Buyer to Accept Goods 
1. The buyer shall be obliged to accept goods given to him with the exception of cases where he has 
the right to demand that goods be replaced or to refuse to fulfil the contract of sale. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law, other legal acts or the contract of sale, the buyer shall be 
obliged to perform actions which in keeping with the usual claims are needed on his part to ensure the 
transfer and receipt of relevant goods. 
3. In cases where the buyer in contravention of the law, other legal acts or the contract of sale does 
not accept goods or refuses to accept them, the seller shall have the right to demand that the buyer should 
accept goods or refuse to fulfil the contract. 
Article 485. The Price of Goods 
1. The buyer shall be obliged to pay for goods at the price, specified by the contract of sale at the 
price fixed in accordance with Item 3 of Article 424 of this Code unless the contract provides for the price 
and unless it may be estimated by proceeding from its terms, and also perform actions at his own expense, 
which in conformity with the law, other legal acts, the contract or the usual requirements are necessary for 
making payments. 
2. When price is set depending on the weight of goods, it shall be estimated according to the net 
weight, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale. 
3. If the contract of sale provides that the price of goods is subject to change depending on the 
indices stipulating the price of goods (cost price, expenses, etc.), but at the same time does not determine 
the method of revision of prices, the price shall be estimated by proceeding from the correlation of these 
indices at the time of concluding the contract and transferring goods. In case the seller delays the 
fulfilment of the duty of handing over goods, the price shall be estimated from the correlation of these 
indices at the time of concluding the contract, and the contract does not provide for this, at the time fixed 
in keeping with Article 314 of this Code. 
The rules envisaged by this Item shall be applicable, unless otherwise stipulated by this Code, other 
law, other legal acts or the contract and unless the contrary follows from the substance of the obligation 
concerned. 
Article 486. The Payment for Goods 
1. The buyer shall be obliged to pay for goods directly before or after the transfer of goods by the 
seller, unless otherwise stipulated by this Code, other laws, other legal acts or the contract of sale and 
unless the contrary follows from the substance of the obligation concerned. 
2. If the contract of sale does not provide for payments for goods by instalment, the buyer shall be 
obliged to payment to the seller the full price for the transferred goods. 
3. If the buyer does not pay for the goods transferred to him in keeping with the contract of sale, the 
seller shall have the right to demand the payment for goods and interest payment in accordance with 
Article 395 of this Code. 
According to Federal Law No. 100-FZ of July 14, 1997 the buyer of agricultural products, raw 
materials and foodstuffs shall pay up a fine to the supplier in the amount of two per cent for every day 
of the delay in the payment from the sum due for the untimely paid for products, and if the payment is 
delayed for more than 30 days in the amount of three per cent  
4. If the buyer refuses to accept goods and pay for them in contravention of the contract of sale, the 
seller shall have the right at his option to demand either the payment for goods or to refuse to fulfil the 
contract. 
5. In cases where in keeping with the contract of sale the seller shall be obliged to hand over to the 
buyer the goods which have not been paid by the buyer and other goods, the seller shall have the right to 
suspend the transfer of these goods until the time when all the goods handed over earlier are paid in full, 
unless otherwise stipulated by the law, other legal acts or the contract. 
Article 487. The Tentative Payment for Goods 
1. In cases where the contract of sale provides for the duty of the buyer to pay for goods in full or in 
part before the transfer by the seller of goods (tentative payment), the buyer shall make payment within 
the period provided for by the contract, and if such period is not envisaged by the contract, within the 
period, determined pursuant to Article 314 of this Code. 
2. In case of default on the duty by the buyer to pay for goods use shall be made of the rules, 
envisaged by Article 328 of this Code. 
3. If the seller who has received the sum of tentative payment fails to discharge the duty of 
transferring goods within the fixed period (Article 457), the buyer shall be obliged to demand the transfer 
of the paid goods or the refund of the sum of the tentative payment for goods which have not been handed 
over by the seller. 
4. If the seller fails to perform the duty of transferring the tentatively paid goods and unless the 
contrary is stipulated by the contract of sale, interest shall be paid to the amount of the tentative payment 
pursuant to Article 395 of this Code since the day when under the contract the goods should have been 
handed over till the day of the transfer of goods to the buyer or the refund to him of the tentatively paid 
sum of money. The contract may provide for the duty of the seller to pay interest to the amount of the 
tentative payment since the day of the receipt of this sum from the buyer. 
Article 488. Payment for Goods Sold on Credit 
1. If the contract of sale provides for the payment for goods over a definite period of time after they 
are handed over to the buyer (sale of goods on credit), the buyer shall effect the payment on due date 
envisaged by the contract, and if such date is not stipulated by the contract, on due date defined in 
keeping with Article 314 of this Code. 
2. In case of default on the duty by the seller to transfer goods, use shall be made of the rules, 
provided for by Article 328 of this Code. 
3. If the buyer who has received goods does not fulfil the duty of payment for them within the 
period fixed by contract of sale, the seller shall be obliged to demand payment for he transferred goods or 
the refund of the goods not paid for. 
4. If the buyer fails to fulfil the duty of paying for the transferred goods in the period stipulated by 
the contract and unless the contrary is specified by this Code or the contract of sale, interest shall be paid 
to the amount of the overdue sum of money in keeping with Article 395 of this Code from the day when 
the goods should have been paid for to the day of payment for goods by the buyer. 
The contract may provide for the duty of the buyer to pay interest to the amount corresponding to 
the price of goods beginning with the day of the transfer of the goods by the seller. 
5. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale, the goods sold on credit from the time of their 
transfer to the buyer and to their payment shall be recognized as held in pledge by the seller for the 
guaranteed execution by the buyer of his duty to make payment for the goods. 
Article 489. Payment for Goods by Instalment 
1. The contract for sale of goods on credit with the proviso on the instalment of date shall be 
deemed to be concluded, if it indicated the price of goods, the procedure, period and amount of payments 
alongside with other essential terms of the contract of sale. 
2. When the buyer fails to make a regular payment for the goods sold by instalment and transferred 
to him within the period stipulated by the contract, the seller shall have the right, unless otherwise 
provided for by the contract, to refuse execute the contract and demand the refund of the sold goods with 
the exception of cases where the sum of payments received from the buyer exceeds half of the price of the 
goods. 
3. The rules envisaged by Items 2, 4 and 5 of Article 488 of this Code shall be applicable to the 
contract for sale on credit. 
Article 490. Insurance of Goods 
The contract of sale may provide for the duty of the seller or the buyer to insure goods. 
If the party duty-bound to ensure goods does not effect insurance in keeping with the contract terms, 
the other party shall have the right to ensure these goods and demand that the duty-bound party reimburse 
the expenses on insurance or refuse to execute the contract. 
Article 491. The Preservation of the Right of Property for the Seller 
In cases where the contract of sale provides that the right of property in the goods handed over to the 
buyer is preserved for the seller before the payment for the goods or the onset of other circumstances, the 
buyer shall not have the right to alienate the goods or dispose of them in any other way before the transfer 
of the right of ownership to him, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the contract or unless the 
contrary follows from the designation and property of the goods. 
In cases where the transferred goods are not paid for within the period specified by the contract or 
where other circumstances emerge under which the right of property passes to the buyer, the seller shall 
have the right to demand the return of the goods to him, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
_ 2. Retail Sale 
Article 492. The Contract of Retail Sale 
1. Under the contract of retail sale the seller engaged in the business of retail sales shall undertake to 
hand over to the buyer goods intended for personal, family, home and any other use unrelated with 
business activity. 
2. The contract of retail sale shall be a public agreement (Article 426). 
3. The laws on the protection of the consumers' rights and other legal acts, adopted in accordance 
with them, shall be applicable to the relations covered by the contract of retail sale with the participation 
of the buyer-individual but not regulated by this Code. 
See Law of the Russian Federation on the Protection of Consumers' Rights in wording of January 9, 
1996 
Article 493. The Form of the Contract of Retail Sale 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the contract of retail sale, including by the terms of law 
blanks or other standard forms, to which the buyer joins (Article 428), the contract of retail sale shall be 
deemed to be concluded in the proper form since the time of the issue by the seller to the buyer of a cash
desk ticket or a sale receipt, or any other document confirming payment for goods. The lack of said 
documents shall not deprive the buyer of the possibility of referring to testimony by witnesses in 
corroboration of the conclusion of the contract and its terms and conditions. 
Article 494. The Public Offer of Goods 
1. The offer of goods in advertisement, merchandise catalogues and descriptions of goods, referred 
to people at large, shall be recognized as a public offer (Item 2 of Article 437), if it contain all the 
essential terms and conditions of the retail sale contract. 
2. The putting up of goods in places of sales (on counters, in windows, etc.), the demonstration of 
other samples or the presentation of information about goods sold (descriptions, catalogues, photographs 
of goods, etc.) in places of sales shall be recognized as a public offer, regardless of the fact whether the 
price or other essential terms and conditions of the retail sale contract, except for the case when the seller 
has clearly determined that relevant goods are not intended for sale. 
Article 495. The Presentation of Information about Goods to the Buyer 
1. The seller shall be obliged to present to the buyer the requisite and trustworthy information about 
goods offered for sale, which corresponds to the requirements, established by the law, other legal acts and 
usually made in retail sale, for the substance and methods of presenting such information. 
2. The buyer shall have the right, before the conclusion of a contract of retail sale, to inspect goods, 
demand the check-up of their properties or their demonstration, unless this is excluded due to the nature 
of goods and contradict the rules accepted in retail sale. 
3. Unless the buyer is given the possibility of receiving forthwith in the place of sale information 
about goods, referred to in Items 1 and 2 of this Article, he shall be entitled to demand from the seller the 
compensation for the losses caused by the unwarranted evasion from the conclusion of the contract of 
retail sale (Item 4 of Article 445), and if the contract has been concluded, to refuse within the reasonable 
period of time from the execution of the contract, to demand the refund of the paid sum of money and the 
compensation for other losses. 
4. The seller who has not offered to the buyer the possibility of receiving relevant information about 
goods shall also bear liability for the defects of goods which arose after their transfer to the buyer, if the 
proves that they had arisen in the absence of such information. 
Article 496. The Sale of Goods with the Proviso That the Buyer Accepts Them 
Within the Fixed Period of Time 
The contract of retail sale may be concluded with the proviso that the buyer accepts goods within 
the fixed period of time, fixed by the contract, during which these goods may not be sold to another 
buyer. 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract, the failure of the buyer to appear or the non-commission 
of other necessary actions for the acceptance of goods in the period of time fixed by the contract may be 
regarded by the seller as a ground for the refusal of the buyer to fulfil the contract. 
The seller's additional expenses on the secured transfer of goods to the buyer in the period of time 
fixed by the contract shall be included in the price of goods, unless otherwise stipulated by the law, other 
legal acts or the contract. 
Article 497. The Sale of Goods by Sample 
1. A contract of retail sale may be concluded on the basis of the familiarization of the buyer with the 
sample of goods (its description, the merchandise catalogue, etc.) offered by the seller. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law, other legal acts or the contract, the contract of retail sale 
by sample shall be deemed to be fulfilled since the time of the delivery of goods to the place indicated in 
the contract, but if the place of the transfer of goods has not been determined by the contract, since the 
time of the delivery of goods to the buyer in the place of residence of an individual or the place of 
location of a legal entity. 
3. Before the transfer of goods the buyer shall have the right to refuse to fulfil the contract of retail 
sale, provided that the seller's necessary expenses incurred on the commission of actions for the fulfilment 
of the contract are compensated. 
See the Rules for the Sales of Goods by Sample approved by Decision of the Government of the 
Russian Federation No. 918 of July 21, 1997  
Article 498. The Sale of Goods with the Use of Vending Machines 
1. In cases where goods are sold with the use of vending machines, the owner of these machines 
shall be obliged to bring to the notice of buyers information about the seller by putting up on the machine 
the data on the name (firm's name) of the seller, the place of his location, the conditions of his work, and 
also on the actions to be committed by the buyer for the receipt of goods or by presenting to the buyer 
such data by any other method. 
2. The contract of retail sale with the use of vending machines shall be deemed to be concluded 
since the time of the commission by the buyer of the actions necessary for the receipt of goods. 
3. If paid goods are not handed over to the buyer, the seller shall be obliged, on the demand of the 
buyer, forthwith to hand over goods to him or to return the sum of money paid by him. 
4. In cases where the vending machine is used for change, the acquisition of currency notes, the 
rules for retail sale shall be applied, unless the contrary follows from the substance of the obligation 
concerned. 
Article 499. The Sale of Goods with the Proviso of Their Delivery to the Buyer 
1. If the contract of retail sale has been concluded with the proviso of the delivery of goods to the 
buyer, the seller shall be obliged to deliver goods to the place indicated by the buyer within the period of 
time, fixed by the contract, and if the place of delivery of goods has not been indicated by the buyer, 
goods shall be delivered to the place of residence of the buying individual or the place of location of the 
buying legal entity. 
2. The contract of retail sale shall be deemed to be executed since the time goods have been handed 
over to the buyer, and in the absence of the latter, to any other person who has produced the receipt or any 
other document testifying to the conclusion of the contract or to the completion of the delivery of goods, 
unless otherwise stipulated by the law, other legal acts or the contract and unless the contrary follows 
from the substance of the obligation concerned. 
3. If the contract fails to fix the time of delivery of goods for handing over to the buyer, goods shall 
be delivered within the reasonable period of time after the receipt of the buyer's claim. 
Article 500. The Price and Payment for Goods 
1. The buyer shall be obliged to pay for goods at the price quoted by the seller at the time of 
concluding the retail sale contract, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or other legal acts or unless 
follow from the substance of the obligation concerned. 
2. If the retail sale contract provides for the tentative payment for goods (Article 487), the non
payment by the buyer of goods in the period of time foxed by the contract shall be deemed to be the 
buyer's refusal to fulfil the contract, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement of the parties thereto. 
3. The rule envisaged by the first paragraph of Item 4 of Article 488 of this Code shall not be 
applied to the contracts of retail sale on credit, including to those with the proviso of payment by the 
buyer for goods by instalment. 
The buyer shall have the right to pay for goods at any time within the contractual period of 
instalment of date. 
Article 501. The Contract of Hire and Sale 
Under the contract the buyer shall be a hirer (leaseholder) of goods given to him (contract of hire 
and sale) prior to the transfer of ownership of goods to the buyer (Article 491). 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract, the buyer shall become the owner of goods since the 
time of payment for goods. 
Article 502. Exchange of Goods 
1. The buyer shall have the right, during 14 days since the time of the transfer of non-food products 
to him, if no longer period is declared by the seller, to exchange the bought products in the place of 
purchase and in other places, announced by the seller, for similar products of a different size, form, 
clearance, style, colour or complete set by making the necessary resettlement with the seller if there is a 
difference in price. 
If the seller has no goods at his disposal needed for exchange, the buyer shall have the right to return 
to the seller the acquired goods and receive the sum of money paid for them. 
The demand of the buyer for exchange or the return of goods shall be subject to satisfaction, unless 
goods have been in use, retained their consumer properties and there is evidence that they have been 
bought from the given seller. 
2. The list of goods which are not subject to exchange or return according to the grounds, referred to 
in this Article, shall be determined in the order prescribed by the law or other legal acts. 
Article 503. The Right of the Buyer in Case of Sale to Him of Goods of 
Improper Quality 
1. The buyer to whom goods of improper quality are sold, if its defects have not been specified by 
the seller, shall have the right to demand at his option: 
the replacement of substandard goods with goods of proper quality; 
appropriate reduction in the purchase price; 
compensation for the expenses incurred in the removal of defects of goods. 
The buyer shall have the right to demand the replacement of hi-tech or expensive goods in case of 
the substantial breach of requirements for their quality (Item 2 of Article 475). 
See the List of Technically Sophisticated Goods in Whose Respects the Demands of the Consumer for 
Their Replacement Shall Be Subject to Satisfaction if Any Essential Faults Have Been Discovered 
Therein approved by Decision of the Government of the Russian Federation No. 575 of May 13, 1997  
2. In case of the discovery of defects of goods whose properties make it possible to remove them 
(food products, household chemical goods, etc.) the buyer shall have the right to replace such goods by 
goods of proper quality or a proportionate reduction in the purchase price. 
3. In place of producing requirements, referred to in Items 1 and 2 of his Article the buyer shall have 
the right to refuse to execute the contract of retail sale and demand the return of the sum of money paid 
for goods. 
In this case the buyer shall return the received goods of improper quality on the demand of the seller 
and at his expense. 
In case of the return by the buyer of the sum of money paid for goods the seller shall have no right 
to withdraw from it the sum of money for which the value of goods fell due to the full or partial use of 
goods, the loss of vendibility or other similar circumstances. 
Article 504. Compensation for the Difference in Price When Goods Are 
Replaced, the Purchase Price Is Reduced and Goods of Improper Quality Are 
Returned 
1. When substandard goods are replaced by goods of proper quality that correspond to the retail sale 
contract, the seller shall have no right to demand compensation for the difference between the price of 
goods specified by the contract and the price of goods existing at the time of the substitution of goods or 
of the delivery by the court of its decision on the replacement of goods. 
2. In case of replacement of substandard goods by similar goods of proper quality but with different 
size, style, sort or other distinctive features, the difference between the price of the replaceable goods at 
the time of substitution and the price of goods handed over in place of substandard goods shall be subject 
to compensation. 
If the demand of the buyer has not been satisfied by the seller, the price of replaceable goods and the 
price of goods handed over in place of them shall be fixed at the time of the delivery by the court of its 
decision on the substitution of goods. 
3. If a demand is made on an adequate reduction in the purchase price of goods, it is necessary to 
take into account the price of goods at the time of making a demand on their price reduction, and if the 
buyer's demand has not been satisfied of one's own accord, at the time of the delivery by the court of its 
decision on the proportionate reduction of the price. 
4. If substandard goods are returned to the seller, the buyer shall have the right to demand 
compensation for the difference between the price of goods fixed by the retail sale contract and the price 
of appropriate goods at the time of the voluntary satisfaction of his demand, and if this demand has not 
been satisfied of his own accord, at the time of the delivery by the court of its decision. 
Article 505. The Liability of the Seller and the Fulfillment of the Obligation in 
Kind 
In case of default on the seller's obligation under the contract of retail sale, the compensation of 
losses and the payment of a penalty shall not absolve the seller from the obligation in kind. 
_ 3. Delivery of Goods 
On several issues connected with the application of the regulations of the Civil Code of the Russian 
Federation on supply agreements see Decision of the Plenum of the Higher Arbitration Court of the 
Russian Federation No. 18 of October 22, 1997  
On the delivery of products also see: 
Regulations on the deliveries of engineering products approved by the Decision of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR No. 888 of July 25, 1988 
Regulations on the deliveries of consumer goods approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers 
of the USSR No. 888 of July 25, 1988 
See the Rules for Gas Supply in the Russian Federation approved by Decision of the Government of 
the Russian Federation No. 162 of February 5, 1998  
Article 506. Contract for Delivery 
Under the contract for delivery the supplier-seller engaged in business shall undertake to transfer to 
the buyer goods produced or purchased by him within the fixed period or periods of time for use in 
business or for other purposes unrelated to personal, family, home or any other use. 
Article 507. Settlement of Disagreements During the Conclusion of the Contract 
for Delivery 
1. When during the conclusion of a contract for delivery disagreements arose between the parties 
over particular terms and conditions of the contract, the party which has offered to conclude the contract 
and received from the other party the proposal on the adjustment of these terms and conditions shall, 
during 30 days since the day of receipt of this proposal, unless a different date is fixed by law and agreed 
upon between the parties, take measures on the coordination of the relevant terms and conditions of the 
contract or notify in writing the other party about the refusal to conclude it. 
2. The party which has received the proposal under the corresponding terms and conditions of the 
contract but has not taken measures to coordinate the terms and conditions of the contract for delivery and 
has not notified the other party about the refusal to conclude the contract on due date, provided for by 
Item 1 of this Article, shall be obliged to compensate the losses caused by the evasion from the 
coordination of the terms and conditions of the contract. 
Article 508. Periods of Delivery of Goods 
1. In case where the parties provide for the delivery of goods during the validity term of the contract 
for delivery by individual consignments and where the periods of delivery of individual batches (periods 
of delivery) have not be defined, goods shall be delivered by even shipments monthly, unless the contrary 
follows from the law, other legal acts, the substance of obligations and the customs of business turnover. 
2. The contract for delivery may establish a schedule of shipments of goods (by decade, day, hour, 
etc.) in addition to the definition of periods of delivery of goods. 
3. Prior delivery of goods may be made with the consent of the buyer. 
Goods supplied short of the term and accepted by the buyer shall be counted towards the quantity of 
goods subject to delivery in the next period. 
Article 509. The Procedure for Delivery of Goods 
1. Goods shall be delivered by the supplier by means of shipment (transfer) of goods to the buyer 
who is a party to the contract for delivery or to the person indicated in the contract as a consignee. 
2. In case where the contract for delivery provides for the right of the buyer to give to the supplier 
directions on the shipment (transfer) of goods to consignees (shipment warrants), goods shall be shipped 
(transferred) by the supplier to the consignees, referred to in the shipment warrant. 
The consent of the shipment warrant and the date of its sending by the buyer to the supplier shall be 
determined by the contract. If the contract does not provide the time of sending a shipment warrant, the 
latter shall be sent to the supplier within 30 days before the onset of the period of delivery. 
3. The non-submission of a shipment warrant by the buyer within the fixed period of time shall 
entitle the supplier either to renounce the execution of the contract for delivery or to demand that the 
buyer pay for goods. Moreover, the supplier shall have the right to claim damages caused in connection 
with the non-submission of the shipment warrant. 
Article 510. Delivery of Goods 
1. Delivery of goods shall be made by the supplier by means of their shipment by transport vehicles, 
provided for by the contract for delivery and on the contractual terms and conditions. 
In cases where the contract fails to determine which type of transportation facility and on which 
conditions goods are to be delivered, the right of choosing the type of transportation facility or of defining 
the conditions of the delivery of goods shall belong to the supplier, unless the contrary follows from the 
law, other legal acts and the substance of the obligation concerned or the customs of business turnover. 
2. The contract for delivery may provide for the receipt of goods by the buyer (consignee) in the 
place of location of the supplier (sampling of goods). 
If the term of sample is not provided by the contract, the sampling of goods shall be carried out by 
the buyer (consignee) within the reasonable period of time after the receipt of the supplier's notification 
about the readiness of goods. 
Article 511. The Replenishment of Short Delivery of Goods 
1. The supplier who has a shortage of delivery of goods in a particular period of delivery shall be 
obliged to replenish the short delivered goods in the next period (periods) within the validity term of the 
contract for delivery, unless otherwise provided for by the contract. 
2. In case where goods are shipped by the supplier to several consignees, referred to in the contract 
for delivery or the shipment warrant of the buyer, goods delivered to one consignee over and the quantity 
envisaged by the contract or the shipment warrant shall not be counted towards the short delivery of 
goods to other consignees, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
3. By notifying the supplier the buyer shall have the right to accept goods whose delivery has been 
overdue, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract for delivery. Goods delivered before the supplier 
receives the notification concerned, the buyer shall be obliged to accept and pay for them. 
Article 512. Assortment of Goods in Case of Replenishing Short Deliveries 
1. Assortment of the short delivered goods subject to replenishment shall be determined by the 
agreement of the parties. In the absence of such agreement the supplier shall be obliged to replenish the 
short delivered quantity of goods in the assortment established for the period in which the goods were 
short delivered. 
2. The delivery of goods of one name in the greater quantity than the contract for delivery provides 
shall not be counted towards the cover of the short delivered goods of another name which form the same 
assortment and shall be subject to replenishment, except for the cases where such delivery was made with 
the preliminary written consent of the buyer. 
Article 513. The Acceptance of Goods by the Buyer 
1. The buyer (consignee) shall be obliged to perform all the necessary actions which ensure the 
acceptance of goods delivered in keeping with the contract for delivery. 
2. Goods received by the buyer (consignee) shall be examined by him within the period of time, 
stipulated by the law, other legal acts, the contract for delivery or the customs of the business turnover. 
The buyer (consignee) shall be obliged to check the quantity and quality of accepted goods within 
the same period of time in the order, prescribed by the law, other legal acts, the contract or the customs of 
business turnover, and to inform the supplier forthwith in writing about the discovered discrepancies or 
defects of goods. 
3. If the buyer (consignee) receives the delivered goods from a transport organization, he shall be 
obliged to check the compliance of these goods with information referred to in transport and 
accompanying documents, and also to accept these goods from the transport organization with the 
observance of the rules stipulated by the laws and other legal acts regulating the activity of transportation 
facilities. 
Article 514. Safekeeping of Goods Which Have Not Been Accepted by the 
Buyer 
1. When in keeping with the law, other legal acts or the contract for delivery the buyer (consignee) 
refuses to accept the goods delivered by the supplier, he shall be obliged to ensure the safety of these 
goods (safekeeping) and inform the supplier immediately. 
2. The supplier shall be obliged to take away the goods accepted by the customs for safekeeping or 
to dispose of them within the reasonable period of time. 
If the supplier fails to dispose of these goods within this period, the buyer shall have the right to sell 
goods or return them to the supplier. 
3. The requisite expenses incurred by buyer in connection with the acceptance of goods for 
safekeeping, the sale of goods or their return to the seller shall be liable to compensation by the supplier. 
In this case, the proceeds from the sale of goods shall be transferred to the supplier minus the 
amount due to the buyer. 
4. In cases where the buyer does not accept goods from the supplier without the grounds, established 
by the law, other legal acts or the contract, or refuses to accept them, the supplier shall have the right to 
demand from the buyer the payment for the goods. 
Article 515. The Sampling of Goods 
1. When the contract for delivery provides for the sampling of goods by the buyer (consignee) in the 
place of location of the supplier (Item 2 of Article 510), the buyer shall be obliged to inspect the 
transferred goods in the place of their transfer, unless otherwise stipulated by the law, other legal acts or 
unless the contrary follows from the substance of the obligation concerned. 
2. The non-sampling of goods by the buyer (consignee) within the period of time specified by the 
contract for delivery, and in the absence of the contract within the reasonable period of time after the 
receipt of the supplier's notification about the readiness of goods shall entitle the supplier to refuse to 
fulfil the contract or to demand that the buyer pay for goods. 
Article 516. Payment for Delivered Goods 
1. The buyer shall pay for delivered goods with the observance of the procedure and form of 
payments stipulated by the contract for delivery. If the agreement between the parties thereto fails to 
determine the procedure and form of payments, payments shall be effected by means of payment orders. 
2. If the contract for delivery provides for the payment for goods to be made by the recipient (payer) 
and the latter has refused without any foundation to pay for goods or failed to pay for them within the 
period of time stipulated by the contract, the supplier shall have the right to demand that the buyer pay for 
the delivered goods. 
3. In case where the contract for delivery provides for the shipment of goods in parts forming the 
set, the payment for goods by the buyer shall be effected after the shipment (sampling) of the last part 
forming the set, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
Article 517. Tare and Packaging 
Unless the contrary is stipulated by the contract for delivery, the buyer (consignee) shall be obliged 
to return to the supplier reusable tare and means of packaging of the delivered goods in the order and in 
the terms stipulated by the law, other legal acts and by the obligatory rules adopted in accordance with or 
by the contract. 
Other tare, and also the packaging of goods shall be returned to the supplier only in cases provided 
for by the contract. 
Article 518. The Consequences of the Delivery of Goods of Improper Quality 
1. The buyer (consignee) to whom goods of improper quality have been supplied shall have the right 
to make claims to the supplier as stipulated by Article 475 of this Code, except for the case when the 
supplier who has received the notification of the buyer about the defects of the delivered goods shall 
without delay substitute goods of proper quality for the delivered goods. 
2. The buyer (consignee) who sells the delivered goods by retail shall have the right to demand 
within the reasonable period of time the substitution for the goods of improper quality, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the contract for delivery. 
Article 519. The Consequences of the Delivery of Incomplete Goods 
1. The buyer (consignee) to whom goods have been supplied with the breach of the terms and 
conditions of the contract for delivery, of the requirements of the law and other legal acts or of the usual 
requirements for completeness shall have the right to make to the supplier claims stipulated by Article 
480 of this Code, except for the case when the supplier who has received the buyer's notification about 
the incomplete set of the delivered goods shall make goods complete without delay or replace these by 
complete goods. 
2. The buyer (consignee) who sells goods by retail shall have the right to demand the replacement 
within the reasonable period of time of incomplete goods returned by the consumer by complete goods, 
unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of delivery. 
Article 520. The Rights of the Buyer in Case of Short Delivery of Goods, the 
Non-fulfilment of the Requirements for the Removal of Defects of Goods or of 
Completing Goods 
1. If the supplier has failed to deliver the quantity of goods, stipulated by the contract for delivery, 
or has not fulfilled the buyer's claim for the replacement of substandard goods or for completing goods 
within the fixed period of time, the buyer shall have the right to acquire short delivered goods from other 
persons and to charge all the necessary and reasonable expenses to the supplier for their acquisition. 
The expenses of the buyer on the acquisition of goods from other persons in cases of their short 
delivery by the supplier or of the non-fulfillment of the buyer's claims for the removal of defects of goods 
or for completing goods shall be reckoned according to the rules, provided for by Item 1 of Article 524 of 
this Code. 
2. The buyer (consignee) shall have the right to refuse to pay for substandard and incomplete goods, 
and if such goods have been paid for, to demand to refund of the paid sums of money pending the 
removal of defects and the completion of goods or of their replacement. 
Article 521. Penalty for Short Delivery or Delay in Delivery of Goods 
The penalty established by the law or the contract for delivery for short delivery or delay in delivery 
of goods shall be recovered from the supplier until the actual execution of the obligation within the limits 
of his duty to replenish the short delivered quantity of goods in subsequent periods of delivery, unless a 
different procedure for the payment of penalty is established by the law or the contract. 
Article 522. Cancellation of Similar Liabilities under Several Contracts for 
Delivery 
1. In cases where goods of the same name are delivered by the supplier to the buyer at once under 
several contracts for delivery and the quantity of delivered goods is insufficient for the cancellation of the 
supplier's liabilities under all contracts, the delivered goods shall be counted towards the execution of the 
contract to be indicated by the supplier when he delivers goods or immediately after this delivery. 
2. If the buyer has paid to the supplier for the goods of the same name, received under several 
contracts for delivery and the sum of payment is insufficient for the cancellation of the buyer's liabilities 
under all contracts, the paid sum of money shall be counted towards the execution of the contract, 
indicated by the buyer when goods are paid for or without delay after payment. 
3. If the supplier or the buyer have not availed of the rights granted to them by Items 1 and 2 of this 
Article, the execution of the liability shall be counted towards the cancellation of the liabilities under the 
contract, where period of execution commenced earlier. If the period of the execution of the liabilities 
under several contracts has commenced simultaneously, the granted execution shall be counted in 
proportion towards the cancellation of the liabilities under all contracts. 
Article 523. Unilateral Waiver of the Execution of the Contract for Delivery 
1. Unilateral waiver of the execution of the contract for delivery (in full or in part) or unilateral 
change of this contract shall be allowed in case of the substantial infringement of the contract by one of 
the parties thereto (the fourth paragraph of Item 2 of Article 450). 
2. The infringement of the contract for delivery by the supplier may be substantial in cases of: 
the delivery of goods of improper quality with defects which cannot be removed in the period 
acceptable for the buyer; 
the repeated breach of the terms of delivery of goods. 
3. The infringement of the contract for delivery by the buyer may be substantial in cases of: 
repeated breach of the terms of payment for goods; 
repeated non-sampling of goods. 
4. The contract for delivery shall be deemed to be altered or dissolved since the time of receipt by 
one party of the notification of the other party about the unilateral waiver to execute the contract in full or 
in part, unless a different term of cancelling or modifying the contract is provided by the notification or 
defined by the agreement of the parties. 
Article 524. The Reckoning of Losses in Case of the Cancellation of the 
Contract 
1. If within the reasonable period of time after the cancellation of the contract due to the 
infringement of the obligation by the seller the buyer bought goods from another person at higher but 
reasonable price instead of goods specified by the contract, the buyer may make to the seller his claim for 
the compensation of losses in the form of the difference between the contractual price and the price under 
the deal made instead. 
2. If within the reasonable period of time after the cancellation of the contract owing to the 
infringement of the obligation by the buyer the seller has sold goods to another person under the 
reasonable but lower price than that stipulated by the contract, the seller may make to the buyer his claim 
for the compensation of losses in the form of the difference between the contractual price and the price 
under the dial made instead. 
3. If after the cancellation of the contract on the grounds, provided for by Items 1 and 2 of this 
Article, no transaction has been made instead of the dissolved contract, and the current price is available 
for these goods, the party may make his claim for the compensation of losses in the form of the difference 
between the price specified by the contract and the current price existing at the time of the dissolution of 
the contract. 
The price that is usually charged under the comparable circumstances for similar goods in the place 
where goods should be transferred shall be recognized as a current price. If there is no current price in this 
place, use may be made of the current price that was used in another place, which may serve as a 
reasonable replacement, with due account of the difference in the expenses on the transportation of goods. 
4. The satisfaction of the requirements, provided for by Items 1, 2 and 3 of this Article, shall not 
release the party, which has not fulfilled or fulfilled the obligation in improper way from the 
compensation of other losses caused by the other party, on the basis of Article 15 of this Code. 
_ 4. Delivery of Goods for State Needs 
On the delivery of goods for federal state needs also see: 
Federal Law No. 97-FZ of May 6, 1999  
Federal Law No. 60-FZ of December 13, 1994 
Federal Law No. 53-FZ of December 2, 1994 
Article 525. The Grounds for the Delivery of Goods for State Needs 
1. Goods shall be delivered to meet state needs on the basis of a state contract for the delivery of 
goods for state needs, and also in keeping with the contracts for delivery of goods, concluded in 
accordance with the state contract (Item 2 of Article 530). State needs shall be recognized to mean the 
statutory needs of the Russian Federation or the subjects of the Russian Federation, which are met from 
the budget resources and the extra-budgetary sources of financing. 
2. The rules for the contract for delivery (Articles 506-523) shall be applicable to the relations 
involved in the delivery of goods for state needs, unless otherwise stipulated by the rules of this Code. 
The laws on the delivery of goods for state needs shall be applicable to the relations involved in the 
delivery of goods for state needs in the part that is not regulated by this paragraph. 
Article 526. The State Contract for the Delivery of Goods for State Needs 
Under the state contract for the delivery of goods for state needs (hereinafter referred to as the state 
contract) the supplier (executor) shall undertake to transfer goods to the state customer or to another 
person according to his direction, whereas the state customer shall undertake to pay for the delivered 
goods. 
Article 527. The Grounds for the Conclusion of State Contracts 
1. A state contract shall be concluded on the basis of the order of a state customer for the delivery of 
goods to meet state needs, accepted by the supplier (executor). 
The conclusion of a state contract shall be mandatory for the state customer who has placed the 
order accepted by the supplier (executor). 
2. The conclusion of a state contract shall be compulsory for the supplier (executor) only in cases 
established by law and provided that the state customer should compensate all the losses which can be 
caused to supplier (executor) in connection with the fulfilment of the state contract. 
3. The condition of compensation of losses, envisaged by Item 2 of this Article, shall not be applied 
to the governmental enterprises not subject to privatization. 
4. If an order for the delivery of goods for state needs is placed by bidding, the conclusion of the 
state contract with the supplier (executor), declared to be the tender winner, shall be compulsory for a 
state customer. 
See Federal Law No. 97-FZ of May 6, 1999 on Tenders for the Placement of Orders for the Supply of 
Goods, Performance of Works, Provision of Services for State Needs  
Article 528. Procedure for the Conclusion of State Contracts 
1. A state contract shall be drafted by a state customer and sent to the supplier (executor), unless 
otherwise stipulated by the agreement between them. 
2. The party which has received the draft of a state contract shall sign it within 30 days and return 
one copy of the state contract to the other party, while in the presence of disagreements on the terms and 
conditions of the state contract shall draw up minutes of disagreements during this period and send it 
together with the signed state contract to the other contract party or shall notify it about the refusal to 
conclude the state contract. 
3. The party which has received the state contract with the minutes of disagreements shall be 
obliged within 30 days to consider disagreements, take measures to adjust them with the other party and 
inform this party about the acceptance of the state contract in its wording or about the rejection of the 
minutes of disagreements. 
In case of rejection of the minutes of disagreements or upon the expiry of this period of time, the 
non-adjusted disagreements under the state contract, the conclusion of which is mandatory for one of the 
parties, may be transferred by the other party for the consideration by a court of law within 30 days. 
4. In case where a state contract is concluded according to the results of the bidding for placing an 
order for the delivery of goods for state needs, the state contract shall be concluded within 30 days since 
the day of the bidding. 
5. If the party for which the conclusion of a state contract is obligatory evades from its conclusion, 
the other party shall have the right to apply to a court of law with the demand of compelling this party to 
conclude the state contract. 
Article 529. The Conclusion of a Contract for Delivery of Goods for State 
Needs 
1. If a state contract provides for the delivery of goods by the supplier (executor) to the buyer, 
defined by the state customer, under the contracts for the delivery of goods for state needs, the state 
customer shall notify within 30 days since the day of signing the state contract the supplier (executor) and 
the buyer about the attachment of the buyer to the supplier (executor). 
The notification about the attachment of the buyer to the supplier (executor), issued by the state 
customer in keeping with the state contract, shall be a ground for the conclusion of a contract for the 
delivery of goods for state needs. 
2. The supplier (executor) shall be obliged to send the draft of the contract for the delivery of goods 
for state needs to the buyer, indicated in the notification about the attachment, within 30 days since the 
day of the receipt of the notification from the state customer, unless a different procedure for drafting a 
contract is stipulated by the state contract or unless the draft of the contract is submitted by the buyer. 
3. The party which has received the draft contract for the delivery of goods for state needs shall sign 
it and return one copy to the other party within 30 days since the day of the receipt of the draft and in the 
presence of disagreements over the contract terms shall draw up during this time minutes of the 
disagreements and send them to the other party together with the signed contract. 
4. The party which has received the signed draft contract for the delivery of goods for state needs 
with the minutes of disagreements shall, during 30 days, consider the disagreements, take measures to 
coordinate the terms and conditions of the contract with the other part and inform the other party about 
the acceptance of the contract in its wording or about the rejection of the minutes of the disagreements. 
non-adjusted disagreements may be transferred by the interested party for the consideration by the court 
within 30 days. 
5. If the supplier (executor) evades from the conclusion of the contract for the delivery of goods for 
state needs, the buyer shall have the right to apply to a court of law with the demand for compelling the 
supplier (executor) to conclude a contract on the terms of the contract drafted by the buyer. 
Article 530. The Buyer's Refusal to Conclude a Contract for the Delivery of 
Goods for State Needs 
1. The buyer shall have the right to refuse wholly or partially from goods, indicated in the 
notification about attachment, and from the conclusion of a contract for their delivery. 
In this case, the supplier (executor) shall forthwith notify the state customer and demand that he 
notify about the attachment to another buyer. 
2. Within 30 days since the day of the receipt of the notification of the supplier (executor), the state 
customer shall issue a notification about the attachment of another buyer to him or send to the supplier 
(executor) a shipment warrant with an indication of the consignee of goods, or state its consent to accept 
and pay for goods. 
3. In case of default on the state customer's duties, provided for by Item 2 of this Article, the 
supplier (executor) shall have the right either to demand that the state customer should accept and pay for 
goods or to sell goods at its discretion with the charge of reasonable expenses incurred in their sale to the 
state customer. 
Article 531. The Execution of the State Contract 
1. In cases where in keeping with terms and conditions of the state contract goods are delivered 
directly to the state customer or according to its direction (shipment warrant) to another person 
(consignee), the relations between the parties in the performance of the state contract shall be regulated by 
the rules stipulated by Articles 506-523 of this Code. 
2. In cases where goods are delivered for state needs by the consignee, indicated in the shipment 
warrant, the goods shall be paid for by the state customer, unless a different procedure for payments is 
envisaged by the state contract. 
Article 532. Payment for Goods Under the Contract for the Delivery of Goods 
for State Needs 
In case of the delivery of goods to the buyers under the contracts for the delivery of goods for state 
needs payment for goods shall be made by the buyers at the prices estimated in accordance with the state 
contract, unless a different procedure determining prices and payments is stipulated by the state contract. 
When the buyer pays for goods under the contract for the delivery of goods for state needs, the state 
customer shall be recognized as a guarantor of this obligation of the buyer (Articles 361-367). 
Article 533. Compensation for Losses Caused in Connection with the Execution 
or Dissolution of a State Contract 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the laws on the delivery of goods for state needs or by a state 
contract, the losses caused to the supplier (executor) in connection with the execution of the state contract 
(Item 2 of Article 527) shall be liable to compensation by the state customer within 30 days since the day 
of the transfer of goods in conformity with the state contract. 
2. In case where the losses caused to the supplier (executor) in connection with the performance of a 
state contract are not compensated in accordance with the state contract, the supplier (executor) shall have 
the right to refuse to perform the state contract and demand the compensation of the losses caused by the 
dissolution of the state contract. 
3. When a state contract is dissolved on the grounds referred to in Item 2 of this Article, the supplier 
shall have the right to refuse to execute the contract for the delivery of goods for state needs. 
The losses caused to the buyer by such refusal of the supplier shall be compensated by the customer. 
Article 534. The Rejection by the State Customer of Goods Delivered Under the 
State Contract 
In cases provided for by law the state customer shall have the right to reject wholly or partially the 
goods whose delivery is stipulated by the state contract, provided that the losses caused by such rejection 
are compensated to the supplier. 
If the rejection by the state customer of the goods whose delivery is provided for by the state 
contract has involved the cancellation or charge of the contract for the delivery of goods for state needs, 
the losses caused to the buyer by such cancellation or change shall be compensated by the state customer. 
_ 5. Sale of Agricultural Produce 
Article 535. Contract of Sale of Agricultural Produce 
1. Under the contract of sale of agricultural produce the agricultural producer shall undertakes to 
transfer the farm products he has grown or produced to the purveyor, the person who purchases such 
products for processing or sale. 
2. The rules for the contract for delivery (Articles 506-524) shall be applicable to the relations 
covered by the contract of and not regulated by the rules of this paragraph, while in cases of the delivery 
of goods for state needs the rules for the contract sale of agricultural produce for delivery (Articles 525
534) shall be applicable. 
On purchases and deliveries of farm products, raw materials and foodstuffs to meet state needs see: 
Federal Law No. 53-FZ of December 2, 1994 
Federal Law No. 100-FZ of July 14, 1997 
Article 536. The Duties of the Purveyor 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of contracting, the purveyor shall be obliged to accept 
farm products from the producer in the place of their location and to ensure their delivery. 
2. In case where farm products are accepted in the place of location of the purveyor or in any other 
place indicated by it, the purveyor shall have no right to refuse to accept farm products which correspond 
to the terms and conditions of the contract of contracting and which have been transferred to the purveyor 
in the period of time, specified by the contract. 
3. The contract of contracting may provide for the duty of the purveyor processing farm products to 
return to the producer the waste of this processing on its demand with payment at the price fixed by the 
contract. 
Article 537. The Duty of the Producer of Farm Products 
The producer of farm products shall be obliged to transfer to the purveyor the grown or produced 
farm products in the quantity and assortment, envisaged by the contract of contracting. 
Article 538. The Liability of the Producer of Farm Products 
The producer of farm products which has failed to fulfil its obligation or has fulfilled it improperly 
shall bear liability in the presence of its fault. 
See an overview of practice of settling disputes associated with the power supply contract (the 
appendix to Information Letter of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 30 of 
February 17, 1998  
_ 6. Power Supply 
See Federal Law No. 35-FZ of March 26, 2003 on Electric Power Industry  
Article 539. The Contract of Power Supply 
1. Under the contract of power supply the energy supplying organization shall undertake to transmit 
power to the user (consumer) through the connected up network, while the user shall undertake to pay for 
accepted power, and also to observe the conditions of its consumption, provided for by the contract, and 
to ensure the safety of the operation of its electrical networks and the working order of the devices and 
equipment use by it and related to the consumption of power. 
2. A contract of power supply shall be concluded with the user, if the latter has at its disposal a 
power receiving device meeting the technical requirements and connected up to the networks of the 
energy supplying organization and other requisite equipment, and also if the user guarantees the 
accounting of the consumption of power. 
3. The laws ad other legal acts on power supply, and also the mandatory rules adopted in conformity 
with them, shall be applicable to the relations covered by the contract of power supply and regulated by 
this Code. 
Federal Law No. 37-FZ of March 26, 2003 supplemented Article 539 of this Code with Item 4:  
4. The rules of this paragraph shall be applicable to the relations under an agreement for supply with 
electric power unless otherwise established by a law or other legal acts. 
Article 540. The Conclusion and Prolongation of the Contract of Power Supply 
1. In cases where the individual acts as a user of power for domestic consumption under the contract 
of power supply, this contract shall be deemed to be concluded since the time of the fixed actual linking 
up of the user to the attached network in the statutory order. 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement of the parties, such contract shall be deemed to be 
concluded for an indefinite period of time and may be altered or dissolved on the grounds, stipulated by 
Article 546 of this Code. 
2. The contract of power supply, concluded for an indefinite period of time, shall be deemed to be 
prolonged for the same period and on the same conditions, if before the expiry of its validity term neither 
party states about its termination or alteration or the conclusion of a new contract. 
3. If one of the parties to the contract has tabled the proposal on the conclusion of a new contract 
before the expiry of its validity term, the relations between the parties shall be regulated by the contract 
concluded earlier before a new contract is to be concluded. 
Article 541. The Quantity of Power 
Federal Law No. 37-FZ of March 26, 2003 amended Item 1 of Article 541 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
1. The energy supplying organization shall be obliged to transmit power to the user through the 
attached network in the quantity provided for by the contract of power supply and with the observance of 
the conditions of transmission to be agreed upon by the parties. The quantity of power transmitted to the 
subscriber and the used up by him shall be estimated in accordance with the data of accounting of its 
actual consumption. 
2. The contract of power supply may provide for the right of the user to change the quantity of 
received power, fixed by the contract, provided the compensation of the expenses incurred by the energy 
supplying organization in connection with the transmission of power in the quantity which is not 
stipulated by the contract 
3. In case where the individual using power for domestic consumption acts as a user under the 
contract of power supply, he shall have the right to use power in the quantity needed by him. 
Article 542. The Quality of Power 
Federal Law No. 37-FZ of March 26, 2003 amended Item 1 of Article 542 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
1. The quality of power transmitted shall correspond to the requirements made by state standards 
and other compulsory rules or envisaged by the contract of power supply. 
2. If the energy supplying organization breaks the requirements for the quality of power, the user 
shall have the right to refuse to pay for such power. In this case, the energy supplying organization shall 
have the right to demand that the user should compensate the cost of the power which the user has saved 
groundlessly in consequence of the use of this power (Item 2 of Article 1105). 
Article 543. The Duties of the Buyer to Maintain and Operate Networks, 
Instruments and Equipment 
1. The user shall be obliged to ensure proper technical condition and safety of the operated electric 
power networks, instruments and equipment, to observe the conditions of power consumption, and also 
immediately inform the energy supplying organization about accidents, fires and troubles in energy 
recording instruments and about other infringements arising during the use of energy. 
2. In case where the individual using power for domestic consumption acts as a user under the 
contract of power supply, the duty of ensuring proper technical condition and safety of electric power 
networks, and also of energy recording instruments shall be discharged by the energy supplying 
organization, unless otherwise stipulated by the law and other legal acts. 
3. Requirements for the technical condition and operation of electric power networks, instruments 
and equipment, and also the procedure for control over their work shall be defined by the law, other legal 
acts or the agreement between the parties. 
Article 544. Payment for Power 
1. The user shall pay for the quantity of power, actually accepted by him, in line with the data of 
power recording, unless otherwise stipulated by the law, other legal acts or the agreement of the parties. 
2. Procedure for payments for energy shall be determined by the law, other legal acts or by the 
agreement between the parties. 
Decree of the President of the Russian Federation No. 1782 of December 28, 1996 established the 
obligatory terms and conditions in respect to the settlements for gas which agreements of gas supply 
executed between gas distribution organizations (re-sellers) and consumers should contain  
Article 545. The Subuser 
The user may transmit power, accepted by it from the energy supplying organization through the 
attached network, to another person (subuser) only with the consent of the energy supplying organization. 
Federal Law No. 37-FZ of March 26, 2003 amended Article 546 of this Code 
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 546. The Modification and Cancellation of the Contract of Power 
Supply 
1. In case where the individual using power for domestic consumption acts as a user under the 
contract of power supply, he shall have the right to cancel the contract unilaterally, provided he informs 
the energy supplying organization about this and pays in full for the used power. 
In case where the legal entity acts as a user under the contract of power supply, the energy supplying 
organization shall have the right to refuse to fulfil the contract unilaterally on the grounds provided for by 
Article 523 of this Code, except for the cases established by the law or other legal acts. 
2. An interval in the supply of power, the termination or restriction of the supply of power shall be 
allowed by agreement between the parties, except for the cases where the unsatisfactory condition of the 
user's power plant, certified by the state power supervision body, endangers the levels and safety of 
individuals. The energy supplying organization shall warn the user about the interruption, termination or 
restriction of the supply of power. 
The termination or restriction of the supply of power without the consent of a subscriber that is a 
juridical person but with the relevant notification thereof shall be permissible in a procedure established 
by a law or other legal acts in the case of violation by the said subscriber of the obligations in the payment 
for the power. 
3. An interval in the supply of power, the termination or restriction of the supply of power without 
agreement with the user and without its appropriate warning shall be allowed whenever it is necessary to 
take urgent measures of preventing or abolishing the accidents provided the latter immediately informs 
the user about this. 
See the Regulations on the Limitation or Temporary Suspension of Electric Energy (Power) Supply to 
Consumers in Case of the Occurrence or Menace of a Power Supply System Breakdown approved by 
Decision of the Government of the Russian Federation No. 664 of June 22, 1999  
On ensuring a stable gas and energy supply to organizations providing for the state security, financed 
at the expense of funds from the federal budget, see Decision of the Government of the Russian 
Federation No. 364 of May 29, 2002  
Article 547. Liability Under the Contract of Power Supply 
1. In cases of default on the obligations or of improper execution of the obligations under the 
contract of power supply, the defaulting party shall be obliged to compensate the real damage caused by 
this (Item 2 of Article 15). 
2. If a result of the regulation of the conditions of power consumption on the basis of the law or 
other legal acts an interval has been made in the supply of the user with power, the energy supplying 
organization shall bear liability for default on the contractual obligations or for their improper fulfilment 
in the presence of its fault. 
Article 548. The Application of the Rules for Power Supply to Other Contracts 
1. The rules envisaged by Articles 539-547 of this Code shall be applicable to the relations 
connected with the supply of thermal power through the attached network, unless otherwise stipulated by 
the law or other legal acts. 
2. The rules for the contract of power supply (Article 539-547) shall be applied to the relations 
involved in the supply of gas, oil and oil products, water and other goods, unless otherwise stipulated by 
the law, other legal acts or unless the contrary follows from the substance of the obligation concerned. 
_ 7. The Sale of Real Estate 
Article 549. The Contract of Sale of Real Estate 
1. Under the contract of sale of real estate the seller shall undertake to transfer into the buyer's 
ownership a land plot, a building or structure, an apartment or other real estate (Article 130). 
2. The rules, provided for by this paragraph, shall be applied to the sale of enterprises inasmuch as 
the contrary is stipulated by the rules for the contract of sale of the enterprise (Articles 559-566). 
Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997 on the State Registration of 
Rights to Real Estate and of Transactions with It shall be enforced on the entire territory of the Russian 
Federation six months after its official publication 
Article 550. The Form of the Contract of Sale of Real Estate 
The contract of sale of real estate shall be concluded in writing by drawing up one document to be 
signed by the parties thereto (Item 2 of Article 434). 
The non-observance of the form of a contract of sale of real estate shall invalidate it. 
Article 551. State Registration of the Transfer the Title to Real Estate 
1. The transfer of the title to real estate under the contract of sale of real estate to the buyer shall be 
subject to state registration. 
On the State Registration of Rights to Real Estate and of Transactions with It see Federal Law of the 
Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997  
2. Before the state registration of the transfer of the title to property the execution of the contract of 
sale of real estate by the parties shall not be a ground for the change of their relations with third persons. 
3. In case where one of the parties evades the state registration of the transfer of the title to real 
estate, the court shall have the right at the request of the other party to pass a decision on the state 
registration of the transfer of the title to property. The party which groundlessly evades the state 
registration of the transfer of the title to property shall be obliged to compensate the losses of the other 
party, caused by the delayed registration. 
Article 552. The Rights to the Land Plot in Case of Sale of the Building, 
Structure or Other Immovables Located on It 
1. Under the contract of sale of the building, structure or other immovables the buyer shall receive 
together with the transferred title to such real estate that part of the land plot which is occupied with this 
real estate and is necessary for its use. 
2. In case where the seller is the owner of the land plot on which the sold real estate is to be found, 
the buyer shall receive the right of property or the right of lease or any other right to the corresponding 
part of the land plot, specified by the contract of sale of real estate. 
If the contract fails to define the right to the corresponding land plot, transferred to the buyer of real 
estate, the right to that part of the land plot that is occupied with immovables and is necessary for their 
use shall pass to the buyer. 
3. The sale of immovables located on the land plot which does not belong to the seller by right of 
ownership shall be allowed without the consent of the owner of this land plot, unless this contradicts the 
terms of the use of such land plot, established by the law or the contract. 
In case of sale of such real estate the buyer shall acquire the right to the use of the corresponding 
part of the land plot on the same conditions as the seller of the real estate does. 
On Some Issues Associated with Application of the Land Legislation, see Ruling of the Plenum of the 
Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 11 of March 24, 2005  
Article 553. The Rights to Real Estate in Case of Sale of a Land Plot 
In cases where the land plot on which the building, structure or other immovables owned by the 
seller are to be found is sold, without its transfer into the ownership of the buyer of this real estate, the 
seller shall retain the right of using the part of the land plot which is occupied with immovables and is 
necessary for their use on the terms to be defined by the contract of sale. 
If the terms of the use of the corresponding part of the land plot has not been defined by the contract 
of its sale, the seller shall retain the right of the restricted use (servitude) of that part of the land plot 
which is occupied with immovables and is necessary for their use in keeping with their purpose. 
Article 554. The Definition of the Subject-matter in the Contract of Sale of Real 
Estate 
The contract of sale of real estate shall indicate the data that make it possible to ascertain real estate 
subject to the transfer to the buyer under the contract, including the data which determine the location of 
real estate on the corresponding land plot or within other real estate. 
In the absence of these data in the contract the condition on the real estate subject to transfer shall be 
deemed not to be agreed upon by the parties thereto and the corresponding contract shall be deemed not 
to be concluded. 
Article 555. Price in the Contract of Sale of Real Estate 
1. The contract of sale of real estate provide for the price of this estate. 
In the absence in the contract of the price clause, agreed upon by the parties thereto in written form, 
the contract of sale of real estate shall be deemed not to be concluded. In this case, the rules for fixing 
price, envisaged by Item 3 of Article 424 of this Code shall not be applied. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the contract of sale of real estate, the price fixed in it for 
the building, structure or other real estate to be found on the land plot shall include the price of the 
corresponding part of the land plot, transferred with this real estate or the right to it. 
3. In cases where the price of real estate in the contract of sale of real estate is fixed per unit of its 
square or per other indicator of its size, the total price of such real estate subject to payment shall be 
estimated by proceeding from the actual size of the real estate transferred to the buyer. 
Article 556. The Transfer of Real Estate 
1. Real estate shall be transferred by the seller and accepted by the buyer on the basis of the deed of 
conveyance or other document on its transfer. 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the contract, the obligation of the seller to transfer real 
estate to the buyer shall be deemed to be executed after this real estate is handed in to the buyer and after 
the parties sign the respective document on the transfer. 
The evasion by one of the parties from the signing of the document on the transfer of real estate on 
the terms and conditions of the contract shall be deemed to imply the refusal of the seller to discharge the 
duty of transferring real estate and that of the buyer to fulfil the duty of accepting such estate. 
2. The acceptance by the buyer of real estate which does not comply with the terms and conditions 
of the contract of sale of real estate, including in case when such non-conformity is specified in the 
document on the transfer of real estate, shall not be a ground for the release of the seller from the liability 
for improper performance of the contract. 
Article 557. The Consequences of the Transfer of Real Estate of Inadequate 
Quality 
In case of the transfer by the seller to the buyer of real estate of inadequate quality, which does not 
comply with the terms and conditions of the contract of sale of real estate on its quality, the rules of 
Article 475 of this Code shall be applied, exception being made for the provisions dealing with the right 
of the buyer to demand the substitution of goods conforming to the contract for goods of improper 
quality. 
Article 558. Specific Aspects of the Sale of Living Accommodation 
1. The list of the persons who retain the statutory right of using the living accommodation after it 
was acquired by the buyer with an indication of their right to use the dwelling being sold shall be a 
substantial condition of the contract of sale of a dwelling house or apartment, part of the dwelling house 
or the apartment. 
2. The contract of sale of a dwelling house or apartment, part of the dwelling house or the apartment 
shall be subject to state registration and shall be deemed to be concluded since the time of such 
registration. 
See the Instructions on the Procedure of State Registration of the Contracts of Purchase and Sale and 
Transfer of Property Rights for Living Space, endorsed by Order of the Ministry of Justice of the 
Russian Federation No. 233 of August 6, 2001  
_ 8. The Sale of Enterprises 
Article 559. The Contract of Sale of the Enterprise 
1. Under the contract of sale of the enterprise the seller shall undertake to transfer into the buyer's 
ownership the enterprise as a whole as a property complex (Article 132) with the exception of the rights 
and duties which the seller has no right to hand over to other persons. 
2. The rights to the firm's name, trademark, service mark and other means of individualization of the 
seller and its goods, works or services, and also the rights to the use of such means of individualization 
belonging to it on the basis of a license shall pass to the buyer, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
3. The rights of the seller, received by it on the basis of the permit (license) for the engagement in 
the respective activity, shall not belong to the transfer to the buyer, unless otherwise stipulated by the law 
or other legal acts. The transfer to the buyer of the enterprise's obligations which it is impossible to 
execute in the absence of such permit (license) for it shall not absolve the seller from the corresponding 
obligations to the creditors. For default on such obligations the seller and the buyer shall bear joint and 
several liability to the creditors. 
Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997 on the State Registration of 
Rights to Real Estate and of Transactions with It shall be enforced on the entire territory of the Russian 
Federation six months after its official publication 
Article 560. The Form and the State Registration of the Contract of Sale of the 
Enterprise 
1. The contract of sale of the enterprise shall be concluded in writing by drawing up one document 
to be signed by the parties thereto (Item 2 of Article 434) with the obligatory addendum to it of the 
documents, referred to in Item 2 of Article 561 of this Code. 
2. The non-observance of the form of the contract of sale of the enterprise shall involve its 
invalidity. 
3. The contract of sale of the enterprise shall be subject to state registration and shall be deemed to 
be concluded since the time of such registration. 
On state registration of rights to an enterprise as a property complex and of transactions with it see 
Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997  
Article 561. Certification of the Structure of the Enterprise to Be Sold 
1. The structure and cost of the enterprise to be sold shall be determined by the contract of sale of 
the enterprise on the basis of its full inventory making, which is carried out in accordance with the rules 
of such inventorying. 
2. Prior to the signing of a contract of sale of the enterprise, the parties thereto shall consider the 
inventorying certificate, the balance-sheet, the opinion of an independent auditor on the structure and cost 
of the enterprise, and also the list of all debts (liabilities), included in the structure of the enterprise with 
an indication of creditors and of the character, amount and terms of their claims. 
The property, rights and duties, referred to in said documents, shall be subjects to the transfer by the 
seller to the buyer, unless the contrary follows from the rules of Article 559 of this Code and unless 
established by the agreement of the parties. 
Article 562. The Rights of Creditors in the Sale of the Enterprise 
1. For liabilities, included in the composition of the enterprise to be sold, the creditors shall be 
notified before it is transferred to the buyer about its sale by one of the parties to the contract of sale of 
the enterprise. 
2. The creditor who has not informed the seller or the buyer about his consent with the transfer of 
the debt shall have the right to demand, during three months since the day of the receipt of the notice 
about the sale of the enterprise, either the termination or the prior execution of the obligation and 
compensation by the seller of the losses caused by this, or the recognition of the contract of sale of the 
enterprise as invalid in full or in the respective part. 
3. The creditor who has not been notified about the ale of the enterprise in the order, prescribed by 
Item 1 of this Article, may bring an action to satisfy the claims, provided for by Item 2 of this Article, 
during the year since the day when he learnt or should have learnt about the transfer of the enterprise by 
the seller to the buyer. 
4. After the transfer of the enterprise to the buyer the seller and the buyer shall bear joint and several 
liability for the debts included in the composition of the transferred enterprise and converted to the buyer 
without the consent of the creditor. 
Article 563. The Transfer of the Enterprise 
1. The enterprise shall be transferred by the seller to the buyer under the deed of conveyance, which 
contains the data on the structure of the enterprise and on the notification of the creditors about the sale of 
the enterprise, and also information about the revealed shortcomings of the transferred property and the 
list of assets, the duty of whose transfer have not been discharged by the seller in view of their loss. 
The preparation of the enterprise for conveyance, including the drawing up of a deed of conveyance 
and the presentation of this act for signing shall the duty of the seller and shall be effected at his expense, 
unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
2. The enterprise shall be deemed to be transferred to the buyer since the day of signing the deed of 
conveyance by both parties. 
Since this time the risk of accidental destruction or damage of property within the enterprise shall 
pass to the buyer. 
Article 564. The Transfer of the Title to the Enterprise 
1. The title to the enterprise shall pass to the buyer since the time of state registration of this title. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of sale of the enterprise, the title to the enterprise shall 
pass to the buyer and shall be subject to state registration immediately after the conveyance of the 
enterprise to the buyer (Article 563). 
3. In cases where the contract provides for the preservation of the seller's title to the enterprise, 
transferred to the buyer, until the payment for the enterprise or the onset of other circumstances, the buyer 
shall have the right to dispose, before the transfer of the title to it, of the assets and rights forming the 
composition of the transferred enterprise to the extent this is necessary for the purposes for which the 
enterprise has been acquired. 
Article 565. The Consequences of the Transfer and Acceptance of the 
Enterprise with Shortcomings 
1. Consequences of the transfer by the seller and of the acceptance by the buyer under the deed of 
conveyance of the enterprise whose structure does not conform, in particular, to the quality of the 
transferred assets, specified by the contract of sale of the enterprise, shall be determined on the basis of 
the rules in Articles 460-462, 466, 469, 475 and 479 of this Code, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
contract and Items 2-4 of this Article. 
2. In case where the enterprise has been transferred and accepted under the deed of conveyance, 
which contains information about the disclosed shortcomings of the enterprise and the lost assets (Item 1 
of Article 563), the buyer shall have the right to demand a corresponding reduction of the purchase price 
of the enterprise, unless the right to make other claims in such cases is provided for by the contract of sale 
of the enterprise. 
3. The buyer shall have the right to demand the reduction of the purchase price in case of the 
transfer of the debts (liabilities) of the seller within the composition of the enterprise, which have not 
been indicated in the contract of sale of the enterprise or in the deed of conveyance, unless the seller 
proves that the buyer has known about such debts (liabilities) during the conclusion of the contract and 
the transfer of the enterprise. 
4. In case of receipt of the buyer's notice about the defects of the property transferred within the 
composition of the enterprise or in the absence in this composition of particular types of property subject 
to the transfer may replace without delay the property of improper quality or present to the buyer the 
missing property. 
5. The buyer shall have the right to demand in due course of law the dissolution or change of the 
contract of sale of the enterprise and the return of what has been executed under the contract, if it is found 
out that the enterprise because of its shortcomings, for which the seller is accountable, does not fit for the 
purposes named in the contract of sale, and these shortcomings have not been removed by the seller on 
the conditions and in the order and terms fixed in keeping with this Code, other laws, other legal acts or 
the contract or its is impossible to eliminate such shortcomings. 
Article 566. The Application to the Contract of Sale of the Enterprise of the 
Rules for the Consequences of the Invalidation of Transactions and for the Change or 
Dissolution of the Contract 
The rules of this Code for the consequences of the invalidation of transactions and for the change or 
the dissolution of the contract of sale, providing for the return or the recovery of the received in kind 
under the contract from one party or from both parties, shall be applied to the contract of sale of the 
enterprise, id such consequences do not violate the rights and law-protected interests of the creditors of 
the seller and the buyer and other persons and do not contradict public interests. 
Chapter 31. Barter 
Article 567. Barter Contract 
1. Under the barter contract each party thereto shall undertake to transfer into the ownership of the 
other party one commodity in exchange for the other commodity. 
2. The rules for purchase and sale (Chapter 30) shall be applied to the barter contract, unless this 
contradicts the rules of this Chapter and the essence of barter. In this case each party shall be recognized 
respectively as the seller of goods which it undertakes to hand over and as the buyer of goods which it 
undertakes to accept in exchange. 
Article 568. Prices and Expenses Under the Barter Contract 
1. Unless the contrary follows from the barter contract, goods subject to exchange shall be assumed 
to be of equal value, while the expenses on their transfer and acceptance shall be incurred in each case by 
the party which bears the respective duties. 
2. In case where in keeping with the barter contract the exchanged goods are recognized as those of 
equal value, the party which is duty-bound to hand over goods whose price is below the price of goods 
offered in exchange shall pay the difference in the prices immediately before or after the execution of its 
duty of transferring goods, unless a different procedure of payment is provided for by the contract. 
Article 569. The Reciprocal Fulfilment of the Obligation of Turning Over 
Goods Under the Barter Contract 
In case where in keeping with the barter contract the periods of the transfer of exchanged goods do 
not coincide, the rules for the reciprocal fulfilment of obligations (Article 328) shall be applied to the 
execution of the obligation of handing over goods by the party which should pass the goods after the 
transfer of the goods by the other party. 
Article 570. The Transfer of the Title to Exchanged Goods 
Unless the law or the barter contract provides otherwise, the title to exchanged goods shall pass to 
the parties acting under the barter contract as buyers simultaneously after the execution of the obligation 
of turning over goods by both parties. 
Article 571. Liability for the Withdrawal of Goods Acquired Under the Barter 
Contract 
The party from which the third party has withdrawn the goods acquired under the barter contract 
shall have the right, in the presence of the grounds, provided for by Article 461 of this Code, to demand 
that the other party should return goods received by the latter in exchange and/or in compensation for 
damages. 
Chapter 32. Donation 
Article 572. Donation Contract 
1. Under the donation contract one party (donor) shall transfer or undertake to transfer free of charge 
to the other part (donee) a thing into ownership or property right (claim) to himself or to a third person 
and release or undertake to release this party from the property obligation to himself or to the third party. 
In the presence of a reciprocal transfer of a thing or right or of a reciprocal obligation the contract 
shall not be recognized as donation. The rules provided for by Item 2 of Article 170 of this Code shall be 
applied to such contract. 
2. The promise of handing over any thing or property right free of charge or of releasing anybody 
from property obligation (promise of donation) shall be recognized as a donation contract and shall bind 
the person who has given the promise, if the latter was made in proper form (Item 2 of Article 574) and 
contains the clearly expressed intention to transfer in future to a specific person a thing or a right free of 
charge or to release him from property obligation. 
The promise to donate all belongings or part of all these belongings without reference to a specific 
object of donation in the form of a thing, right or the release from obligation shall be null and void. 
3. The contract stipulating the transfer of a gift to the donee after the death of the donor shall be null 
and void. 
The rules of civil legislation on inheritance shall be applied to this kind of donation. 
Article 573. The Donee's Refusal to Accept the Gift 
1. The donee shall have the right to abandon the gift at any time before it is handed over to him. In 
this case, the donation contract shall be deemed to be dissolved. 
2. If a donation contract has been concluded in writing, the rejection of the gift shall also be made in 
writing. In case where the donation contract has been registered (Item 3 of Article 574), the rejection of 
the gift shall also be subject to state registration. 
3. If a donation contract has been concluded in writing, the donor shall have the right to demand that 
the donee should compensate for the real damage inflicted by the refusal to accept the gift. 
Article 574. The Form of the Donation Contract 
1. Donation, accompanied by the transfer of the gift to the donee, may be accomplished orally, 
except for the cases, provided for by Items 2 and 3 of this Article. 
The gift shall be presented by handing order, symbolic transfer (delivery of keys, etc.) or delivery of 
law-making documents. 
2. The contract of donation of movables shall be made in writing in cases when: 
the donor is represented by a legal entity and the value of the gift exceeds the statutory five-fold 
amounts of the minimum wages or salaries; 
the contract contains the promise of donation in the future. 
In cases provided for by this Item the donation contract made orally shall be null and void. 
3. The donation contract of real estate shall be subject to state registration. 
On the State Registration of Rights to Real Estate and of Transactions with It see Federal Law of the 
Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997  
Article 575. Ban of Donation 
It shall be impermissible to donate gifts, except for common gifts, whose value does not exceed the 
statutory five-fold amounts of the minimum wages or salaries: 
1) on behalf of minors and legally unfit individuals and by their legal representatives; 
2) to the workers of medical treatment, educational, social protection and other similar institutions 
by individuals who are treated, maintained or educated by them, and by spouses and relatives of these 
persons; 
3) to civil servants and employees of municipal bodies in connection with their official status or the 
discharge of their official duties; 
4) in relations between profit-making organizations. 
Article 576. The Restriction of Donation 
1. The legal entity owning a thing by right of economic or operative management shall have the 
right to donate it with the consent of the owner, unless otherwise stipulated by law. This restriction shall 
not extend to usual gifts of small value. 
2. Property held in common joint ownership may be donated by agreement of all those who have a 
stake in joint ownership with the observance of the rules, specified by Article 253 of this Code. 
3. The donor's right to make claims to a third party shall be donated with the observance of the rules, 
stipulated by Articles 382-386, 388 and 389 of this Code. 
4. Donation by means of the execution of the donee's duty to a third party shall be effected with the 
observance of the rules, provided for by Item 1 of Article 313 of this Code. 
Donation by means of the transfer by the donor of the donee's debt to a third party shall be effected 
with the observance of the rules, specified by Articles 391 and 392 of this Code. 
5. A power of attorney for the execution of donation by the representative, in which a donee is not 
named and an object of donation is not indicated, shall be null and void. 
Article 577. The Refusal to Execute the Donation Contract 
1. The donor shall have the right to refuse to execute the contract containing the promise of handing 
over a thing or a right to the donee in the future or to release the donee from property obligation; if after 
the conclusion of the contract the property or family status or the state of health of the donor has changed 
so much that the execution of the contract will lead under new conditions to a substantial reduction of his 
standard of life. 
2. The donor shall have the right to refuse to execute the contract containing the promise of giving a 
thing or a right to the donee in the future or to release the donee from property obligation on the grounds 
that entitle him to revoke donation (Item 1 of Article 578). 
3. The refusal of the donor to execute the donation contract on the grounds, stipulated by Items 1 
and 2 of this Article, shall not entitle the donee to claim damages. 
Article 578. The Revocation of Donation 
1. The donor shall have the right to revoke donation, if the donee has committed an attempt on his 
life, the life of any of his family members or close relatives or has committed deliberately a bodily injury 
to the donor. 
In case of the intentional homicide of the donor by the donee the right to claim in court the 
revocation of donation shall belong to the donor's heirs. 
2. The donor shall have the right to demand judicially the revocation of donation, if the donee's 
treatment of the gift which has a great intangible value for the donor creates a threat of its irrevocable 
loss. 
3. At the request of the interested person the court of law may revoke the donation of the individual 
businessman or the legal entity in violation of the provisions of the law on insolvency (bankruptcy) from 
the pecuniary means, associated with his business, during six months that preceded the declaration of this 
person as insolvent (bankrupt). 
4. The donation contract may specify the donor's right to revoke donation, if he outlives the donee. 
5. In case of revocation of donation the donee shall be obliged to return the gift, if the latter had 
been preserved in kind by the time of the revocation of donation. 
Article 579. Cases in Which the Refusal to Execute the Donation Contract and 
the Revocation of Donation Are Impossible 
The rules for the refusal to execute the donation contract (Article 577) and for the revocation of 
donation (Article 578) shall not be applied to common gifts of small value. 
Article 580. The Consequences of the Infliction of Damage Owing to the 
Defects of the Gift 
The injury inflicted on the donee's life or health and property tort owing to the defects of the gift 
shall be subject to indemnity by the donor in keeping with the rules, provided for by Chapter 59 of this 
Code, if it is proved that these defects had arisen before the transfer of the donated thing to the donee, that 
they do not relate to obvious shortcomings and the donor did not warn the donee about them, though he 
had known about them. 
Article 581. Legal Succession in Case of a Promise of Donation 
1. The rights of the donee to whom a gift has been promised under the donation contract shall not be 
passed to his heirs (successors), unless otherwise stipulated by the donation contract. 
2. The duties of the donor who has promised donation shall pass to his heirs (successors), unless 
otherwise stipulated by the donation contract. 
Article 582. Endowment 
1. The donation of a thing or right for general useful purposes shall be recognized as endowment. 
Endowment may be made to individuals, medical treatment and instructional institutions, social 
protection institutions and other similar institutions, charitable and scientific institutions and educational 
establishments, funds, museums and other cultural institutions, public associations and religious 
organizations, and also to the State and other subjects of civil law, referred to in Article 124 of this Code. 
On donations to political party and its regional branches, see Federal Law No. 95-FZ of July 11, 2001  
2. No permission or consent shall be required for the acceptance of an endowment. 
3. The endowment of property to an individual shall be conditioned by the donor, while the 
endowment of property to a legal entity may be conditioned by him by the use of this property according 
to a definite purpose. In the absence of such condition the endowment of property to an individual shall 
be regarded as donation, while in other cases the endowed property shall be used by the donee in keeping 
with the designation of property. 
The legal entity which accepts the endowment to be used for a definite purpose shall keep a separate 
record of all transactions involved in the use of the endowed property. 
4. If it is impossible to use the endowed property in accordance with the purpose indicated by the 
donor due to the changed circumstances, it may be used according to another purpose only with the 
consent of the donor, while in cases of the death of the donor-individual or of the liquidation of the legal 
entity only with the consent of the donor and by a court decision. 
5. The use of endowed property out of accordance with the purpose indicated by the donor or the 
change of this purpose with the contravention of the rules, provided for by Item 4 of this Article, shall 
entitle the donor, his heirs or any other successor to demand the revocation of the endowment. 
6. Articles 578 and 581 of this Code shall not be applied to endowment. 
Chapter 33. Rent and Life Maintenance with Dependence 
_ 1. General Provisions on Rent and Life 
Maintenance with Dependence 
Article 583. The Rent Contract 
1. Under the rent contract one party (rent recipient) shall transfer property to the other party (rent 
payer) into his ownership, whereas the rent payer shall undertake to pay periodically rent to the recipient 
in the form of a definite sum of money or to provide money on his maintenance in a different form in 
exchange for the received property. 
2. Under the rent contract it is possible to provide for the duty of paying rent on a permanent basis 
(permanent rent) or for the entire period of life of the rent recipient (life annuity). Life annuity may be 
established on the terms of the life maintenance of an individual with dependence. 
Article 584. The Form of the Rent Contract 
The rent contract shall be subject to notarization, whereas the contract providing for the alienation 
of real estate on the disbursement of rent shall also be subject to state registration. 
Article 585. Alienation of Property on Rent Disbursement 
1. Property to be alienated on rent disbursement may be turned over by the rent recipient for the 
ownership of the rent payer for charge or free of charge. 
2. In case where the rent contract provides for the transfer of property for charge, the rules for 
purchase and sale (Chapter 30) shall be applied to the relations of the parties involved in transfer and 
payment, and in case where such property is transferred free of charge, the rules for the donation contract 
(Chapter 32) shall be applied inasmuch as the rules of this Chapter stipulate otherwise and do not 
contradict the substance of the rent contract. 
Article 586. Encumbrance of Real Estate with Rent 
1. The rent shall encumber the land plot, enterprise, building, structure or any other real estate, 
transferred on its payments. In case of alienation of such property by the rent payer, his obligations under 
the rent contract shall pass on the acquirer of property. 
2. The person who transferred real estate encumbered with rent for the ownership of another person 
shall bear together with him subsidiary liability (Article 399) on the demands of the rent recipient which 
have arisen in connection with the violation of the rent contract unless the present Code, other law or 
contract provide joint and several responsibility under this liability. 
Article 587. Security for Rent Payment 
1. In case of transfer of a land plot or any other immovable property on rent payment the rent 
recipient shall acquire the right of pledge to this property as security for the rent payer's obligation. 
2. The clause establishing the duty of the rent payer to present security for the discharge of his 
obligations (Article 329) or to ensure the risk of liability in favour of the rent recipient for default on these 
obligations or for their improper discharge shall be the essential condition of the contract stipulating the 
transfer of a pecuniary sum or other movable assets. 
3. In case of default by the rent payer on the obligations, provided for by Item 2 of this Article, and 
also in case of loss of security or the deterioration of its conditions due to the circumstances for which the 
rent recipient is not answerable, the rent recipient shall have the right to dissolve the rent contract and 
claim damages caused by the dissolution of the contract. 
Article 588. Liability for Delayed Rent Payment 
For delayed rent payment the rent payer shall pay to the recipient interest, stipulated by Article 395 
of this Code, unless a different amount of interest is specified by the rent contract. 
_ 2. Permanent Rent 
Article 589. Permanent Rent Recipient 
1. Only individuals, and also non-profit organizations may be the permanent rent recipient, unless 
this contradicts the law and if this corresponds to the aims of their activity. 
2. The rights of the rent recipient may be transferred under the permanent rent contract to the 
persons, referred to in Item 1 of this Article, by means of assignment of a claim and descend by 
inheritance or by way of legal succession in case of the reorganization of legal entities, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the law or the contract. 
Article 590. The Form and Amount of Permanent Rent 
1. Permanent rent shall be paid out in money terms in the amount fixed by the contract. 
The permanent rent contract may provide for the payment of rent by presenting things, performing 
works or rendering services that correspond to the pecuniary sum of the rent in value terms. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the permanent rent contract, the amount of the paid rent shall rise 
in proportion to the increase in the statutory minimum wages or salaries. 
Article 591. The Dates of Permanent Rent Payment 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the permanent rent contract, permanent rent shall be paid out upon 
the end of each calendar quarter. 
Article 592. The Payer's Right to Permanent Rent Redemption 
1. The payer of permanent rent shall have the right to refuse to make the further disbursement of 
rent by means of its redemption. 
2. Such refusal shall be valid, provided that it has been made by the rent payer in written form 
within three months before the cessation of the payment of rent or for longer periods fixed by the 
permanent rent contract. In this case, the obligation of rent payment shall not terminate until the receipt of 
the entire sum of redemption by the rent recipient, unless a different redemption procedure is stipulated 
by the contract. 
3. The condition of the permanent rent contract concerning the rent payer's refusal to use the right of 
redemption shall be null and void. 
The contract may stipulate that the right to the permanent rent redemption may not be exercised 
during the lifetime of the rent recipient or during different periods that do not exceed 30 years since the 
conclusion of the contract. 
Article 593. The Redemption of Permanent Rent on the Demand of the Rent 
Recipient 
The permanent rent recipient shall have the right to demand the redemption of rent by the payer in 
the cases when: 
the rent payer has delayed its payment for more than one year, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
permanent rent contract; 
the rent payer has breaches his obligations of security rent payment (Article 587); 
the rent payer has been recognized as insolvent or other circumstances have appeared to testify 
patently to the fact that rent will not be paid out by him in the amount and in the period of time fixed by 
the contract; 
real estate, transferred against the rent payment, has replenished common property or has been 
divided among several persons; 
in other cases specified by the contract. 
Article 594. Redemption Price of Permanent Rent 
1. Redemption of permanent price in cases, provided for by Articles 592 and 593 of this Code, shall 
be effected at the price fixed by the permanent rent contract. 
2. In the absence of a clause on redemption price in the permanent rent contract, under which 
property has been transferred for charge on payment of permanent rent, redemption shall be made at the 
price that corresponds to the annual sum of rent subject to payment. 
3. In the absence of a clause on redemption price in the permanent rent contract, under which 
property has been transferred for rent payment free of charge, redemption price shall include in addition 
to the annual sum of rental payments the price of the transferred property to be determined according to 
the rules, provided for by Item 3 of Article 424 of this Code. 
Article 595. Risk of Accidental Destruction of Property Transferred on Payment 
of Permanent Rent 
1. The risk of accidental destruction or accidental damage of the property, transferred free of charge 
on payment of permanent rent, shall be borne by the rent payer. 
2. In case of accidental destruction or accidental damage of the property, transferred for charge on 
payment of permanent rent, the payer shall have the right to demand accordingly the cessation of the 
obligation of rent payment or the charge of the conditions of its payment. 
_ 3. Life Annuity 
Article 596. Life Annuity Recipient 
1. Life annuity may be established for the period of life of the individual who conveys property on 
rent payment or for the period of life of another individual indicated by the former individual. 
2. It shall be permissible to introduce life annuity in favour of some individuals whose shares in the 
right to receive rent are regarded as equal, unless otherwise stipulated by the life annuity contract. 
In case of death of one of the rent recipients his share in the right to rent shall pass to the rent 
recipients who outlived him, unless the life annuity contract provides otherwise, and in case of death of 
the last recipient the rent payment obligation shall cease. 
3. The contract establishing a life annuity in favour of the individual who had died by the time of 
concluding the contract shall be null and void. 
Article 597. The Amount of Life Annuity 
1. Life annuity shall be defined by the contract as a sum of money periodically paid out to the rent 
recipient during his life. 
2. The amount of life annuity, defined in the contract, shall be per month not less than the minimum 
amount of the wage or salary, established by the law and in cases, provided for by Article 318 of this 
Code, shall be subject to increase. 
Article 598. Dates of Payment of Life Annuity 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the life annuity contract, life annuity shall be paid out at the end of 
each calendar month. 
Article 599. The Cancellation of the Life Annuity Contract on the Demand of 
the Rent Recipient 
1. In case of essential violation of the life annuity contract by the rent payer, the rent recipient shall 
have the right to demand that the rent payer redeem rent on the terms, provided for by Article 594 of this 
Code, or cancel the contract and claim for compensation. 
2. If an apartment, dwelling house or any other property has been alienated free of charge on 
payment of life annuity, the rent recipient shall have the right to demand this property in case of the 
substantial violation of the contract by the rent payer with the offset against its value on account of the 
redemption price of rent. 
Article 600. Risk of Accidental Destruction of Property Transferred in Payment 
for Life Annuity 
The accidental destruction or the accidental damage of the property transferred in payment for life 
annuity shall not absolve the rent payer from the obligation to pay it on the terms, provided for by the life 
annuity contract. 
_ 4. Life Maintenance with Dependency 
Article 601. The Contract of Life Maintenance with Dependency 
1. Under the contract of life maintenance with dependency the rent recipient-individual shall transfer 
the dwelling house, apartment or land plot he owns or any other real estate into the ownership of the rent 
payer, who undertakes to carry on life maintenance with the dependency of the individual and/or the third 
person (persons) indicated by him. 
2. The rules for life maintenance shall be applicable to the contract of life maintenance with 
dependency, unless otherwise stipulated by the rules of this paragraph. 
Article 602. The Duty of Providing Maintenance with Dependency 
1. The duty by the rent payer to provide the maintenance with dependency may include the 
satisfaction of needs in a dwelling, food and clothing, and if this is required by the individual's state of 
health, also the care of him. The contract of life maintenance with dependency may also provide for the 
payment of funeral services. 
2. The contract of life maintenance with dependency shall estimate the value of the entire scope of 
maintenance with dependency. In this case, the value of the whole scope of monthly maintenance may not 
be less than two minimum amounts of statutory wages or salaries. 
3. In settling the dispute between the parties over the scope of maintenance to be provided to an 
individual the court of law shall be guided by the principles of integrity and reasonableness. 
Article 603. Replacement of Life Maintenance by Periodical Payments 
The contract of life maintenance with dependency may provide for possible replacement of the 
provision of maintenance with dependency in kind with periodical monetary payments during the life of 
the individual. 
Article 604. Alienation and Use of Property Transferred for Life Maintenance 
The rent payer shall have the right to alienate, put in pledge or in any other way encumber real 
estate, transferred to him as security of life maintenance, only with the preliminary consent of the rent 
recipient. 
The rent payer shall be obliged to take necessary measures so that the use of said property during 
the period of the provision of life maintenance with dependency should not reduce the value of this 
property. 
Article 605. The Termination of Life Maintenance with Dependency 
1. The obligation of life maintenance with dependency shall cease with the death of the rent 
recipient. 
2. In case of substantial breach by the rent payer of his obligations the rent recipient shall have the 
right to demand the return of real estate, transferred as security of life maintenance or the disbursement of 
redemption price on the terms, prescribed by Article 594 of this Code. In this case, the rent payer shall not 
have the right to claim the compensation for the expenses incurred in connection with the maintenance of 
the rent recipient. 
Chapter 34. Lease 
See also Review of the practice of resolving the disputes, involved in leasing given by Informational 
Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 66 of January 
11, 2002  
_ 1. General Provisions on Lease 
Article 606. Lease Agreement 
Under the lease agreement (contract for lease of property) the lessor shall undertake to furnish to the 
leaseholder (hirer) property for charge in temporary possession and use or in temporary use. 
Fruit, produce and income received by the leaseholder as a result of leased property in keeping with 
the agreement shall be his property. 
Article 607. Objects of Lease 
1. Land plots and other separate natural objects, enterprises and other property complexes, 
buildings, structures, equipment, transport vehicles and other things, which do not forfeit their natural 
properties in the process of their use (non-consumed things) may be let on lease. 
The law may institute types of property which cannot be let on lease or can be leased with 
restriction. 
2. The law may establish specific aspects of the lease of land plots and other separate natural 
objects. 
3. The lease agreement shall indicate data that make it possible to ascertain definitely property 
subject to the transfer to the leaseholder as an object of lease. In the absence of these data in the 
agreement the clause on the object subject to lease shall be deemed to not agreed upon by the parties, and 
the appropriate agreement shall not be regarded as concluded. 
Article 608. Lessor 
The right of leasing property shall belong to its owner. Lessors may also be represented by the 
persons who are authorized by law or by the owner to let property on lease. 
Article 609. The Form and State Registration of the Lease Agreement 
1. The lease agreement for a term of over one year shall be concluded in writing, and if at least one 
of the party is represented by a legal entity the lease agreement shall be concluded in writing, regardless 
of its term. 
2. The agreement for lease of real estate shall be subject to state registration, unless otherwise 
stipulated by law. 
About the state registration of the right of leasing immovable property see Federal Law of the Russian 
Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997 
3. The agreement for lease of property that provides for the transfer of the title to this property to the 
leaseholder (Article 624) shall be concluded in the form stipulated for the contract of sale of such 
property. 
Article 610. The Validity Term of the Lease Agreement 
1. The lease agreement shall be concluded for a term to be defined by the agreement. 
2. If the period of lease is not defined by the agreement, the lease agreement shall be deemed to be 
concluded for an indefinite period. 
In this case, each party shall have the right to recede at any time from the agreement by warning the 
other party one month before schedule and in case of real estate lease - three months before schedule. The 
law may fix a different period for warning that the lease agreement, concluded for an indefinite term, 
ceases to be valid. 
3. The law may provide for a maximum period (deadline) of the agreement for particular types of 
lease, and also for the lease of particular types of property. In these cases, if the term of the lease is not 
fixed by the agreement and neither party has receded from it before the expiry of the maximum period, 
fixed by the law, the agreement shall cease to operate upon the expiry of the deadline. 
The lease agreement concluded for a term exceeding the statutory maximum period shall be deemed 
to be concluded for a term equal to the time-limit. 
Article 611. The Supply of Property to the Leaseholder 
1. The lessor shall be obliged to supply property to the leaseholder in the state meeting the terms and 
conditions of the lease agreement and the purpose of property. 
2. Property shall be let on lease together with all its accessories and related documents (technical 
certificate, quality certificate, etc.), unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement. 
If such accessories and documents have not been handed over, the leaseholder may not use property 
in accordance with its designation or is largely deprived of those assets on which he had the right to count 
when he concluded the agreement and he may claim for the supply of such accessories and documents by 
the lessor or for the cancellation of the agreement, and also for compensation of losses. 
3. If the lessor has failed to furnish to the leaseholder the leased property within the period fixed in 
the agreement or within the reasonable period when the agreement does not indicate such period, the 
leaseholder shall have the right to reclaim this property from him in keeping with Article 398 of this Code 
and claim damages caused by delayed execution or to demand the dissolution of the agreement and to 
claim damages caused by its non-execution. 
Article 612. The Liability of the Lessor for Defects of the Leased Property 
1. The lessor shall be answerable for the defects of leased property which prevent in full or in part to 
its use, if even during the conclusion of the contract he did not know about these defects. 
In case of discovery of such defects the leaseholder shall have the right at his option: 
the demand that the lessor should either remove free of charge the defects of property or reduce 
proportionately the rental payment, or indemnify his expenses on the removal of the defects of property; 
to deduct directly the sum of the expenses incurred in the removal of these defects from the rental 
payment by notifying the lessor about this in advance; 
to demand the anticipatory dissolution of the contract. 
The lessor, who is notified about the leaseholder's claims or about his intention to eliminate the 
defects of property at the expense of the lessor, may replace without delay the property granted to the 
leaseholder by other similar property in a proper state or remove its defects free of charge. 
If the satisfaction of the leaseholder's claims or the deduction by him of the expenses on the removal 
of the defects from the rental payment does not cover the losses caused to the leaseholder, he shall have 
the right to demand the reparation of the uncovered part of the losses. 
2. The lessor shall not be liable for the defects of the leased property which have been specified by 
him during the conclusion of the lease agreement or had been known to the leaseholder beforehand or 
should have been discovered by the leaseholder during the inspection of the property or the verification of 
its good condition during the conclusion of the agreement or the granting of property on lease. 
Article 613. The Rights of Third Parties to the Leased Property 
The lease of property shall not be a ground for the termination or charge of the rights of third parties 
to this property. 
During the conclusion of a lease agreement the lessor shall be obliged to warn the leaseholder about 
all the rights of third parties to the leased property (servitude, right of pledge, etc.). Default by the lessor 
on this duty shall entitle the leaseholder to demand a reduction in the rental payment or to dissolve the 
agreement and compensate for the losses. 
Article 614. Rental Payment 
1. The leaseholder shall be obliged to make a charge for the use of property (rental payment) in due 
time. 
Procedure, conditions and terms of making the rental payment shall be determined by the lease 
agreement. In case where the agreement does not determine the procedure, conditions and terms of 
making the rental payment, it shall be held that the procedure, conditions and terms are usually applied in 
the lease of similar property under comparable circumstances. 
2. The rental payment shall be introduced for the leased property as a while or for each component 
in the form: 
1) the fixed sum of payments made periodically or in a lump; 
2) the established share of products, fruits or incomes obtained as a result of the use of leased 
property; 
3) definite services rendered by the leaseholder; 
4) the transfer by the leaseholder to the lessor of the thing specified by the contract for ownership or 
lease; 
5) the payment by the leaseholder of the costs stipulated by the agreement for the improvement of 
leased property. 
In the lease agreement the parties thereto may provide for the combination of said forms of the 
rental payment or for other forms of lease payment. 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement, the amount of the rental payment may be changed 
by agreement of the parties in the periods, provided for by the agreement, but at least once in a year. The 
law may envisage other minimum terms of the review of the amount of the rental payment for particular 
types of lease, and also for the lease of particular types of property. 
4. Unless the law provides for otherwise, the leaseholder shall have the right to demand a 
corresponding reduction of the rental payment, if in view of the circumstances for which he is not 
answerable, the conditions of the use, specified by the lease agreement, or the state of property have 
deteriorated substantially. 
5. Unless otherwise stipulated by the lease agreement, in case the leaseholder has substantially 
violated the terms of making the rental payment, the lessor shall have the right to demand that he should 
make the rental payment short of the term in the period fixed by the lessor. In this case. the lessor shall 
not have the right to demand an anticipatory payment of the rental for more than two terms in succession. 
Article 615. The Use of Leased Property 
1. The leaseholder shall be obliged to make use of leased property in accordance with the terms and 
conditions of the lease agreement, and if such terms and conditions in the agreement have not been 
defined, in accordance with the purpose of property. 
2. The leaseholder shall have the right to let the leased property in sub-tenancy with the consent of 
the lessor and to transfer his rights and duties under the lease agreement to another person (transfer of 
lease), to place the leased property in gratuitous use, and also to put the leasehold interests in pledge and 
to introduce them as a contribution to the authorized capital of economic partnerships and societies or as a 
share to the producer cooperative, unless otherwise stipulated by this Code, other law or other legal acts. 
In said cases, with the exception of the transfer of lease, the leaseholder shall remain to be liable under the 
agreement to the lessor. 
A sublease contract may not be concluded for the term exceeding the term of the lease agreement. 
The rules for lease agreements shall be applied to the sublease contracts, unless otherwise stipulated 
by the law or other legal acts. 
3. If the leaseholder makes use of property out of accordance with the terms and conditions of the 
lease agreement and the purpose of property, the lessor shall have the right to demand the dissolution of 
the agreement and claim damages. 
Article 616. The Duty of the Parties to Maintain Leased Property 
1. The lessor shall be obliged to carry out the overhaul of leased property at his expense, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the law, other legal acts or the lease agreement. 
An overhaul shall be carried out on time, fixed by the agreement, and if it is not provided for by the 
agreement or is caused by urgent necessity, it shall be carried out within the reasonable period. 
The breach by the lessor of the duty of making an overhaul shall entitle the leaseholder to 
implement the following measures at his option: 
to carry out the overhaul, specified by the agreement or caused by urgent necessity and to exact 
from the lessor the cost of the overhaul or to count towards the rental payment; 
to demand a corresponding reduction of the rental payment; 
to demand the dissolution of the agreement and to claim damages. 
2. The leaseholder shall be obliged to maintain property in good condition, to carry out an overhaul 
at his own expense and incur expenses on the maintenance of property, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
law or the lease agreement. 
Article 617. The Preservation of the Lease Agreement in Force in Case of the 
Change of the Parties Thereto 
1. The transfer of the right of ownership (economic management, operative management, life 
inheritable possession) of leased property to another person shall not be a ground for the alteration or 
dissolution of the lease agreement. 
2. In case of death of the individual who leases real estate, his rights and duties shall pass to the heir 
under the lease agreement, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the agreement. 
The lessor shall have no right to refuse such heir to enter in the agreement for the remaining term of 
its validity, except for the case when its conclusion was conditioned by the leaseholder's personal 
qualities. 
Article 618. The Termination of the Sublease Contract in Case of the 
Anticipatory Cessation of the Lease Agreement 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the lease agreement, the anticipatory cessation of the lease 
agreement shall involve the termination of the sublease contract concluded in accordance with the 
agreement. In this case the subleaseholder shall have the right to conclude a lease agreement on the 
property used by him in keeping with the sublease contract within the remaining period of sublease on the 
terms and conditions that correspond to those of the ceased lease agreement. 
2. If the lease agreement is null and void on the grounds, provided for by this Code, the sublease 
contract concluded in conformity with it shall also be null and void. 
Article 619. Early Rescission of the Lease Agreement on Demand of the Lessor 
At the request of the lessor the lease agreement may be dissolved by a court of law short of the term 
in cases when the leaseholder: 
1) makes use of property with the substantial violation of the terms and conditions of the agreement 
or of the purpose of property, or with repeated breaches; 
2) substantially deteriorates property; 
3) fails to make a rental payment for more than two times in succession upon the expiry of the 
payment date, fixed by the agreement; 
4) fails to carry out an overhaul of property in the time-limits fixed by the lease agreement, and in 
the absence of them in the agreement within reasonable periods in cases where in conformity with the 
law, other legal acts or the agreement the overhaul is the duty of the leaseholder. 
The lease agreement may provide for other grounds of the anticipatory dissolution of the agreement 
on the demand of the lessor in compliance with Item 2 of Article 450 of this Code. 
The lessor shall have the right to demand that the agreement be dissolved short of the term only 
after the sending to the leaseholder a written warning about the need to execute the obligation by him 
within the reasonable period of time. 
Article 620. The Anticipatory Dissolution of the Lease Agreement on the 
Demand of the Leaseholder 
At the request of the leaseholder the lease agreement may be dissolved short of the term by a court 
of law in cases when: 
1) the lessor fails to grant property for use by the leaseholder or creates impediments to the use of 
property in keeping with the terms and conditions of the agreement or the purpose of property; 
2) the property transferred to the leaseholder has the defects which prevent its use and which have 
not been specified by the lessor during the conclusion of the agreement, have not been known to the 
leaseholder in advance and should not have been discovered by the leaseholder during the inspection of 
the property or the verification of its serviceability at the time of the conclusion of the agreement; 
3) the lessor does not carry out the duty of effecting major repairs of property within the time-limits 
fixed by the lease agreement and in their absence - within the reasonable period of time; 
4) property proves to be in a faulty condition in view of the circumstances beyond the control of the 
leaseholder. 
The lease agreement may also institute other grounds for the anticipatory dissolution of the 
agreement on the demand of the leaseholder in keeping with Item 2 of Article 450 of this Code. 
Article 621. The Leaseholder's Preferential Right to Conclude a Lease 
Agreement for a New Term 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the lease agreement, the leaseholder who discharged his 
duties properly shall have, with other things being equal, the right of preference to other persons to the 
conclusion of a lease agreement for a new term upon the expiry of the validity term of the agreement. The 
leaseholder shall be obliged to inform in writing the lessor about his desire to conclude such agreement, 
and if the agreement does not indicate such time - within the reasonable period before the expiry of the 
validity term of the agreement. 
With the conclusion of a lease agreement for a new period the terms and conditions of the 
agreement may be changed by agreement between the parties thereto. 
If the lessor has denied the leaseholder the conclusion of an agreement for a new term, but has 
concluded the lease agreement with another person during one year since the day of the expiry of the 
validity term of the agreement, the leaseholder shall have the right at his option to demand in court the 
transfer of the rights and duties under the concluded agreement to himself and the reparation of the losses, 
caused by the refusal to resume the lease agreement with him, or the reparation of such losses alone. 
2. If the leaseholder continues to make use of property after the expiry of the validity term of the 
agreement in the absence of objections on the part of the lessor, the agreement shall be deemed to be 
resumed on the same conditions for an indefinite period of time (Article 610). 
Article 622. The Return of Leased Property to the Lessor 
With the termination of the lease agreement the leaseholder shall be obliged to return to the lessor in 
the same condition in which he received it with an allowance for normal wear and tear or in the condition 
specified by the agreement. 
If the leaseholder has failed to return leased property or returned it untimely, the lessor shall have 
the right to demand that the rental payment be made during all the time of its delay. In case of where the 
said payment does not cover the losses caused to the lessor, the leaseholder may claim damages. 
In case where a penalty is provided for the untimely return of leased property, losses may be 
recovered in full measure over and above the penalty, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement. 
Article 623. Improvements of Leased Property 
1. Separable improvements of leased property made by the leaseholder shall be his property, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the lease agreement. 
2. In case where the leaseholder has made the improvements in leased property, which are not 
separable without detriment to this property, at the expense of his own pecuniary means and with the 
consent of the lessor, the leaseholder shall have the right to the replacement of the value of these 
improvements after the termination of the agreement, unless otherwise stipulated by the lease agreement. 
3. The value of inseparable improvements of leased property made by the leaseholder without the 
lessor's consent shall be subject to reparation, unless otherwise stipulated by the law. 
4. Improvements in leased property, both separable and unseparable, made at the expense of 
depreciation deductions from this property shall be the property of the leaseholder. 
Article 624. Redemption of Leased Property 
1. The law or the lease agreement may stipulate that leased property is to be passed into the hands of 
the leaseholder upon the expiry of the period of lease or before its expiry, provided that the leaseholder 
has paid the entire redemption price, specified by the agreement. 
2. If the lease agreement does not provide for the clause on the redemption of leased property, it 
may be introduced by the additional agreement of the parties, which have the right to come to an 
agreement on the reckoning of the earlier paid rental in the redemption price. 
3. The law may specify cases of banning the redemption of leased property. 
Article 625. Specific Aspects of Particular Types of Lease and Lease of 
Particular Kinds of Property 
Provisions stipulated by this paragraph shall be applicable to particular types of the lease agreement 
and the agreement of lease of particular kinds of property (hire, lease of transport vehicles, rent of 
buildings and structures, rent of enterprises, financial lease), unless otherwise stipulated by the rules of 
this Code on these agreements. 
_ 2. Hire 
Article 626. The Hire Contract 
1. Under the hire contract the lessor who lets property on lease as permanent business shall 
undertake to grant to the leaseholder movable property for charge in temporary possession and use. 
Property given under the hire contract shall be used for consumer purposes, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the contract or unless the contrary follows from the substance of the obligation. 
2. The hire contract shall be concluded in writing. 
3. The hire contract shall be a public agreement (Article 426). 
Article 627. The Term of the Hire Contract 
1. The hire contract shall be concluded for a term of one year. 
2. The rules for the renewal of the lease agreement for an indefinite period and for the preferential 
right of the leaseholder to renew the lease agreement (Article 621) shall not be applicable to the hire 
contract. 
3. The leaseholder shall have the right to abandon the hire contract at any time by warning the lessor 
in writing about his intention within ten days. 
Article 628. The Granting of Property to the Leaseholder 
The lessor who concludes the hire contract shall be obliged to verify the serviceability of leased 
property in the presence of the leaseholder, and also to acquaint the leaseholder with the rules of using 
property or to issue to him written instructions on the use of this property. 
Article 629. Removal of Defects of Leased Property 
1. In case of discovery by the leaseholder of defects in leased property that wholly or partially 
prevent its use, the lessor shall be obliged, within 10 days since the day of the leaseholder's statement on 
defects, unless the hire contract provides for a shorter period, to remove free of charge the defects of 
property on the spot or to replace this property for other similar property held in proper condition. 
2. If the defects of leased property have resulted from the breach by the leaseholder of the rules of 
the operation and maintenance of property, the leaseholder shall pay to the lessor the cost of repairs and 
transportation of property. 
Article 630. Rental Payment Under the Hire Contract 
1. A rental payment under the hire contract shall be fixed in definite payments made periodically or 
in the lump. 
2. If the leaseholder returns property short of the term, the lessor shall return to him the 
corresponding part of the received rental payment, reckoning it since the day succeeding the day of the 
actual return of property. 
3. Recovery of rental payment arrears from the leaseholder shall be effected in the extra-judicial 
order on the basis of the notary's endorsement of execution. 
Article 631. The Use of Leased Property 
1. Major and current repairs of property leased under the hire contract shall be the duty of the lessor. 
2. The sub-lease of the property granted to the leaseholder under the hire contract, the transfer by 
him of his rights and duties under the hire contract to another person, the provision of this property for 
gratuitous use, the pledge of lease rights and their contribution as a property share to economic 
partnerships and companies or as a share to producer cooperatives shall not be allowed. 
_ 3. Lease of Transport Vehicles 
1. Lease of a Transport Vehicle with the Provision of Services for 
Driving and Technical Operation 
Article 632. The Agreement of Lease of a Transport Vehicle with Its Crew 
Under the agreement of lease (chartering for a time) of a transport vehicle with its crew the lessor 
shall grant to the leaseholder a transport vehicle for charge in temporary possession and use and shall 
render the services for driving it and technical operation. 
The rules for the renewal of the lease agreement for an indefinite period and for the preferential 
right of the leaseholder to the conclusion of a lease agreement for a new period (Article 621) shall not be 
applicable to the lease agreement of a transport vehicle with its crew. 
Article 633. The Form of the Agreement of Lease of a Transport Vehicle with 
Its Crew 
The agreement of lease of a transport vehicle with its crew shall be concluded in writing, regardless 
of its validity term. The rules for the registration of lease agreements, provided for by Item 2 of Article 
609 of this Code, shall not be applicable to such agreement. 
Article 634. The Duty of the Lessor to Maintain a Transport Vehicle 
During the entire validity term of the agreement of lease of a transport vehicle with its crew the 
lessor shall be obliged to maintain the proper condition of the leased transport vehicle, including minor 
and major repairs and the provision of requisite accessories. 
Article 635. The Duty of the Lessor to Drive and Operate a Transport Vehicle 
1. The services of driving and operating a transport vehicle granted by the lessor to the leaseholder 
shall provide for its normal and safe operation in keeping with the purposes of lease specified in the 
agreement. The agreement of lease of a transport vehicle with its crew may envisage a wider range of 
services offered to the leaseholder. 
2. The crew of a transport vehicle and the skill of its members shall comply with the rules obligatory 
for the parties, the terms and conditions of the agreement, and if such requirements have not been 
established by those mandatory rules, the crew and the skill of its members shall comply with the 
requirements of the usual practice of the operation of the transport vehicle of this type and with the terms 
and conditions of the agreement. 
The crew members shall be the workers of the lessor. They shall be subordinate to the lessor's orders 
dealing with driving and technical operation and to the leaseholder's order dealing with the commercial 
exploitation of the transport vehicle. 
Unless the lease agreement provides otherwise, the expenses on the payment for the services of the 
crew members, and also the expenses incurred in their maintenance shall be borne by the lessor. 
Article 636. The Duty of the Leaseholder to Pay Expenses Incurred in the 
Commercial Exploitation of a Transport Vehicle 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement of lease of a transport vehicle with its crew, the 
leaseholder shall bear the expenses incurred in the commercial exploitation of a transport vehicle, 
including the expenses on the payment for fuel and other materials spent during this exploitation and on 
the payment of fees. 
Article 637. Insurance of a Transport Vehicle 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement of lease of a transport vehicle with its crew, the duty 
of insuring the transport vehicle and/or insuring the liability for the damage which can be caused by it or 
in connection with its operation shall be vested with the leaseholder in those cases where such insurance 
is obligatory by virtue of the law or the agreement. 
Article 638. Agreements with Third Parties on the Use of a Transport Vehicle 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement of lease of a transport vehicle with its crew, the 
leaseholder shall be obliged to sublease the transport vehicle without the lessor's consent. 
2. Within the framework of the commercial exploitation of a leased transport vehicle the leaseholder 
shall have the right to conclude on his own behalf contracts of carriage and other contracts with third 
parties without the lessor's consent, unless these contracts contradict the purposes of the use of the 
transport vehicle, indicated in the lease agreement, and if such purposes have not been set, unless these 
contracts contradict the designation of the transport vehicle. 
Article 639. Liability for the Harm Caused to a Transport Vehicle 
In case of the destruction of or damage to the leased transport vehicle the leaseholder shall be 
obliged to compensate to the lessor for the losses caused, if the latter proves that the destruction of or the 
damage to the transport vehicle have taken place due to the circumstances for which the leaseholder is 
answerable in keeping with the law or the lease agreement. 
Article 640. Liability for the Harm Caused by a Transport Vehicle 
The liability for the harm, caused to third persons by the leased transport vehicle, its mechanisms, 
devices, equipment, shall be borne by the leaseholder in keeping with the rules, envisaged by Chapter 59 
of this Code. He shall have the right to have recourse against the leaseholder concerning the 
reimbursement of the sums of money paid to third persons, if he proves that the harm has been caused 
through the fault of the leaseholder. 
Article 641. Specific Aspects of Transport Vehicles of Particular Types 
The transport charters and codes may provide for the lease of transport vehicles of particular types 
and the provision of driving and technical operation services with their specific aspects other than those 
specified by this paragraph. 
See the Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999  
2. The Lease of a Transport Vehicle Without Driving and  
Technical Operation Services 
Article 642. The Agreement of Lease of a Transport Vehicle without a Crew 
Under the agreement of lease of a transport vehicle without a crew the lessor shall give to the 
leaseholder the transport vehicle for charge in his temporary possession and use without rendering the 
driving and technical operation services. 
The rules for the renewal of the lease agreement for an indefinite period and for the preferential 
right of the leaseholder to conclude the lease agreement for a new period (Article 621) shall not be 
applicable to the agreement of lease of a transport vehicle without a crew. 
Article 643. The Form of the Agreement of Lease of a Transport Vehicle 
Without a Crew 
The agreement of lease of a transport vehicle without a crew shall be concluded in writing, 
regardless of its validity term. The rules for the registration of lease agreements, envisaged by Item 2 of 
Article 609 of this Code, shall not be applied to such agreement. 
Article 644. The Lessor's Duty of Maintaining a Transport Vehicle 
During the entire validity term of the agreement of lease of a transport vehicle without a crew the 
leaseholder shall be obliged to support the proper condition of the leased transport vehicle, including to 
carry on minor and major repairs. 
Article 645. The Leaseholder's Duty of Driving a Transport Vehicle and 
Operating It 
The leaseholder shall drive the leased transport vehicle on his own and carry out its commercial 
exploitation and technical operation. 
Article 646. The Leaseholder's Duty of Paying the Expenses Incurred in the 
Maintenance of a Transport Vehicle 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement of lease of a transport vehicle without a crew, the 
leaseholder shall bear expenses on the maintenance of the leased transport vehicle and its insurance, 
including the insurance of his liability, and also expenses arising from its operation. 
Article 647. Contracts with Third Persons on the Use of a Transport Vehicle 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement of lease of a transport vehicle without a crew, the 
leaseholder shall have the right to sublease the leased transport vehicle without the lessor's consent on the 
terms and conditions of the agreement of lease of the transport vehicle with the crew or without it. 
2. The leaseholder shall have the right, on his behalf and without the lessor's consent, to conclude 
contracts of carriage and other contracts with third persons, unless these contracts contradict the purposes 
of the use of the transport vehicle, indicated in the lease agreement, and if such purposes have not been 
set, unless these contracts contradict the designation of the transport vehicle. 
Article 648. Liability for the Harm Inflicted by a Transport Vehicle 
The liability for the harm caused to third persons by a transport vehicle, its mechanisms, devices and 
equipment shall be borne by the leaseholder in keeping with the rules of Chapter 59 of this Code. 
Article 649. Specific Aspects of the Lease of Transport Vehicles of Particular 
Types 
The transport charters and codes may provide for the lease of transport vehicles of particular types 
without the provision of driving and technical operation services with their specific aspects other than 
those specified by this paragraph. 
_ 4. The Lease of Buildings and Structures  
Article 650. The Contract of Lease of a Building or Structure 
1. Under the contract of lease of a building or structure the lessor shall undertake to transfer to the 
leaseholder a building or a structure in temporary possession or use in temporary use. 
2. The rules of this paragraph shall be applied to the lease of enterprises, unless otherwise stipulated 
by the rules of this Code for the lease of enterprises. 
Article 651. The Form and State Registration of the Contract of Lease of a 
Building or Structure 
1. A contract of lease of a building or structure shall be concluded in writing by drawing up one 
document to be signed by the parties thereto (Item 2 of Article 434). 
Non-observance of the form of the contract of lease of a building or structure shall invalidate it. 
2. The contract of lease of a building or structure, concluded for a term of not less than a year, shall 
be subject to state registration and shall be deemed to be concluded since the time of such registration. 
About the right of leasing immovable property see Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ 
of July 21, 1997  
Article 652. The Rights to the Land Plot with the Leased Building or Structure 
1. Under the contract of lease of a building or structure the leaseholder shall receive together with 
the rights of possession and use of such tenement the right to that part of the land plot which is occupied 
by this treatment and which is needed for its use. 
2. In cases where the lessor is the owner of the land plot with the leased building or structure 
situated on it the leaseholder shall receive the right of lease of the building or structure, to the appropriate 
part of the land plot. 
If the contract does not specify the right to the corresponding land plot to be transferred to the 
leaseholder, he shall receive for the term of the lease of the building or structure the right of use of that 
part of the land plot which is occupied by the building or the structure and is needed for its use in 
accordance with its purpose. 
3. The lease of the building or structure situated on the land plot that does not belong to the lessor by 
right of ownership shall be allowed without the consent of the owner of this plot, unless this runs counter 
to the terms of the use of such plot, established by the law or the contract concluded with the owner of the 
land plot. 
Article 653. The Preservation by the Tenant of the Building or Structure of the 
Use of the Land Plot in Case of Its Sale 
In cases where the land plot with the leased building or structure situated on it is sold to another 
person, the leaseholder of this building or structure shall retain the right of use of the part of the land plot, 
which is occupied by the building or structure and which is needed for its use, on the terms that were in 
effect before the sale of the land plot. 
Article 654. The Amount of the Rental Payment 
1. The contract of lease of a building or structure shall provide for the amount of the rental payment. 
In the absence of the proviso on the amount of the rental payment, agreed upon by the parties thereto in 
writing, the contract of lease of a building or structure shall be deemed to be non-concluded. In this case 
the rules for determining the price, stipulated by Item 3 of Article 424 of this Code, shall not be applied. 
2. The charge for the use of the building or structure, fixed in the contract of lease of the building or 
structure, shall include the charge for the use of the land plot on which it is situated or for the 
corresponding part of the land plot transferred together with the building or structure, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the law or the contract. 
3. In cases where the charge for the lease of the building or structure is fixed in the contract per unit 
of the square of the building (structure) or another index of its size, the rental payment shall be 
determined on the basis of the actual size of the building or structure transferred to the leaseholder. 
Article 655. The Transfer of the Building or Structure 
1. The building or structure shall be transferred by the lessor and accepted by the leaseholder on the 
strength of the deed of conveyance or another document to be signed by the parties. 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the contract of lease of a building or structure, the 
obligation of the lessor to transfer the building or structure shall be deemed to be executed after it is given 
to the leaseholder in possession or use and after the parties have signed the respective document. 
The evasion by one of the parties from signing the document on the transfer of the building or 
structure on the conditions stipulated by the contract shall be regarded as a refusal of the lessor from the 
discharge of the obligation of transferring the property, and of the leaseholder from the acceptance of this 
property. 
2. With the termination of the contract of lease of a building or structure the leased building or 
structure shall be returned to the lessor with the observance of the rules, provided for by Item 1 of this 
Article. 
_ 5. The Lease of Enterprises 
Article 656. The Contract of Lease of the Enterprise 
1. Under the contract of lease of the enterprise as a property complex to be used for business the 
lessor shall undertake to grant to the leaseholder for charge in temporary possession and use land plots, 
buildings, structures, equipment and other fixed assets included in the enterprise, to transfer in the order, 
on the terms and within the limits of the contract the stocks of raw materials, fuel, auxiliary materials and 
other current assets, the rights of using land, water and other natural resources, buildings, structures and 
equipment, other property rights of the lessor related to the enterprise, the rights to the signs which 
individualize the performance of the enterprise, and other exclusive rights, and also to cede to him the 
rights of claims and to transfer to him the debts of the enterprise. The transfer of the rights of possession 
and use of the assets held in the ownership of other persons, including land and other natural resources, 
shall be effected in the order, provided for by the law and other legal acts. 
2. The rights of the lessor, received by him on the basis of the permit (license) for the engagement in 
the respective activity, shall not be transferred to the leaseholder, unless otherwise stipulated by the law 
or other legal acts. The inclusion in the composition of the enterprise to be transferred under the contract 
of the obligations which the leaseholder is unable to execute in the absence of such permit (license) shall 
not release the lessor from the corresponding obligations to creditors. 
Article 657. The Rights of Creditors in Case of the Lease of an Enterprise 
1. Under the obligations included in the composition of the enterprise the creditors shall be notified 
in writing by the lessor about the lease of the enterprise before it is transferred to the leaseholder. 
2. The creditor who has failed to inform the lessor in writing about his consent to transfer the debt 
shall have the right to demand the termination or the anticipatory execution of the obligation and the 
compensation for the losses caused by this during three months since the day of receipt of the notice of 
the lease of the enterprise. 
3. The creditor who has not been notified about the lease of the enterprise in the procedure, 
envisaged by Item 1 of this Article, may bring an action about the satisfaction of the claims, stipulated by 
Item 2 of this Article, during one year since the day when he has known or should have known about the 
lease of the enterprise. 
4. After the lease of the enterprise the lessor and the leaseholder shall bear joint and several liability 
for the debts, which have been included in the leased enterprise and which have been transferred to the 
leaseholder without the creditor's consent. 
Article 658. The Form and State Registration of the Contract of Lease of an 
Enterprise 
1. The contract of lease of an enterprise shall be concluded in writing by drawing up one document 
to be signed by the parties thereto (Item 2 of Article 434). 
2. The contract of lease of an enterprise shall be subject to state registration and shall be deemed to 
be concluded since the time of such registration. 
On State registration of rights to an enterprise as a property complex and of transactions with it see 
Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997  
3. Non-observance of the form of the contract of lease of an enterprise shall invalidate it. 
Article 659. The Transfer of the Leased Enterprise 
The enterprise shall be transferred to the leaseholder under the deed of conveyance. 
It shall be the duty of the lessor to prepare the enterprise for its transfer, to draw up and submit the 
deed of conveyance for signing. These operations shall be carried out at his expense, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the contract of lease of the enterprise. 
Article 660. The Use of the Property of the Leased Enterprise 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of lease of an enterprise, the leaseholder shall have the 
right, without the lessor's consent, to sell, exchange, grant for temporary use or lend out material values 
that form part of the property of the leased enterprise, to sublease them and to transfer his rights and 
duties under the contract of lease in respect of such values to another person, provided that his does not 
involve the reduction of the cost of the enterprise and does not violate the other provisions of the contract 
of the lease of the enterprise. The said procedure shall not be applied to land and other natural resources, 
and also in other cases envisaged by the law. 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of lease of the enterprise, the leaseholder shall have the 
right, without the lessor's consent, to introduce changes to the composition of the leased property 
complex, to carry out its reconstruction, expansion, and technical re-equipment that increases its cost. 
Article 661. The Leaseholder's Duties of Maintaining the Enterprise and 
Disbursing Expenses on Its Operation 
1. During the entire validity term of the contract of lease of the enterprise the leaseholder shall be 
obliged to maintain the enterprise in proper technical condition, and also to carry out its current and major 
repairs. 
2. The leaseholder shall bear the expenses incurred in the operation of the leased enterprise, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the contract, and also in the payment for the insurance of the leased property. 
Article 662. The Introduction of Improvements to the Leased Enterprise by the 
Leaseholder 
The leaseholder of an enterprise shall have the right to the compensation to him of the cost of 
inseparable improvements in the leased property, regardless of the permission of the lessor for such 
improvements, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of lease of the enterprise. 
The lessor may be dispensed by the court from the duty of compensating to the leaseholder the cost 
of such improvements, if he proves that the leaseholder's outlays on these improvements increase the cost 
of the leased property in disproportion to the improvement of its quality and/or operation properties or in 
case of such improvements the principles of conscientiousness and reasonableness have been breached. 
Article 663. The Application of the Rules for the Consequences of the Invalidity 
of Transactions and for the Alteration and Dissolution of Contracts to the Contract of 
Lease of the Enterprise 
The rules of this Code for the consequences of the invalidity of transactions and for the alteration 
and dissolution of the contract, which provide for the return or recovery in kind of the received payment 
under the contract from one party or from both parties, shall be applicable to the contract of lease of the 
enterprise, unless such consequences violate substantially the rights and law-protected interests of the 
creditors of the lessor and the leaseholder and other persons and unless they run counter to public 
interests. 
Article 664. The Return of the Leased Enterprise 
With the termination of the contract of lease of the enterprise the leased property complex shall be 
returned to the lessor with the observance of the rules, provided for by Articles 656, 657 and 659 of this 
Code. In this case the preparation of the enterprise for the transfer to the lessor, including the drawing up 
and submission of a deed of conveyance for signing shall be the duty of the leaseholder and shall be 
effected at his expense, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
_ 6. Financial Lease (Leasing) 
Article 665. The Contract of Financial Lease 
Under the contract of financial lease (leasing contract) the lessor shall undertake to acquire the 
property indicated by the leaseholder from the seller specified by him and to grant to the leaseholder this 
contract for charge in temporary possession and use for business purposes. In this case the lessor shall 
bear no responsibility for the choice of a subject of the lease and of a seller. 
The contract of financial lease may provide for making the choice of a seller and acquired property 
by the lessor. 
The leasing of assets in the form of non-consumable things (except for land plots and other natural 
bodies) is regulated by Federal Law No. 164-FZ of October 29, 1998 on Leasing  
About the leasing in the sphere of agroindustrial production see Federal Law No. 100-FZ of July 14, 
1997  
Article 666. The Subject of the Contract of Financial Lease 
Any non-consumed things used in business, except for land plots and other natural objects may be 
the subject of the contract of financial lease. 
Article 667. The Notification of the Seller about the Lease of Property 
The lessor who acquires property for the leaseholder shall notify the seller that this property is 
intended for its lease by a definite person. 
Article 668. The Transfer of the Subject of the Contract of Financial Lease to 
the Leaseholder 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of financial lease, the property which is the subject of 
this contract shall be transferred by the seller directly the leaseholder in the place of location of the latter. 
2. In case where property, being the subject of the contract of financial lease, is not transferred to the 
leaseholder in the period fixed in the contract or in the reasonable period, if the contract does not fix such 
date, the leaseholder shall have the right to demand the dissolution of the contract and claim damages, if 
delay was caused by the circumstances beyond the contract of the lessor. 
Article 669. The Transfer of the Risk of Accidental Destruction of, or 
Accidental Damage to, Property to the Leaseholder 
The risk of accidental destruction of, or accidental damage to, the leased property shall pass to the 
leaseholder at the time of the transfer of the leased property to him, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
contract of financial lease. 
Article 670. Liability of the Seller 
1. The leaseholder shall have the right to place directly to the seller of the property, which is the 
subject of the contract of financial lease, the claims, following from the contract of sale, concluded 
between the seller and the lessor, for the quality and completeness of the property, the terms of its 
delivery and in other cases of the improper performance of the contract by the seller. In this case the 
leaseholder shall have the rights and bear the duties, provided for by this Code for the buyer, except for 
the duty of paying for the acquired property, as if he was a party to the contract of sale of said property. 
However the leaseholder may not dissolve the contract of sale with the seller without the lessor's consent. 
In their relations with the seller the leaseholder and the lessor act as joint and several creditors 
(Article 326). 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of financial lease, the lessor shall not be liable to the 
leaseholder for the fulfilment by the seller of the claims following from the contract of sale, except in 
cases where the responsibility for the choice of a seller rests with the lessor. In the latter case the 
leaseholder shall have the right at his own option to make claims following from the contract of sale, both 
directly to the seller of property and to the lessor, who bear joint and several liability. 
On the rights and duties of the participants in the lease and license contract see Federal Law No. 164
FZ of October 29, 1998 on Leasing  
Chapter 35. The Renting of Living Accommodation 
On the Social Tenancy of Dwelling Premises, see the Housing Code of the Russian Federation No. 
188-FZ of December 29, 2004  
Article 671. The Contract of Renting Living Accommodation 
1. Under the contract of renting living accommodation one party - the owner of living quarters or 
the person authorized by him (renter) - shall be obliged to give to the other part (tenant) living 
accommodation for charge in possession and use for residing in it. 
2. Living accommodation may be granted to legal entities in possession and/or use on the basis of 
the lease agreement or another contract. A legal entity may use living quarters for the residence of private 
persons alone. 
Article 672. The Contract of Renting Living Accommodation in the State and 
Municipal Housing Stock of Social Use 
1. Living quarters in the state and municipal housing stock in social use shall be given to individuals 
under the contract of the social renting of living accommodation. 
2. The members of the family residing under the contract of the social renting of living 
accommodation together with the tenant shall enjoy all the rights and bear all the obligations under the 
contract of renting living quarters on a par with the tenant. 
On the demand of the tenant and the members of his family the contract may be concluded with one 
members of the family. In case of death of the tenant or of his retirement from living quarters the contract 
shall be concluded with one family members residing in these quarters. 
Federal Law No. 189-FZ of December 29, 2004 amended Item 3 of Article 672 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
3. A contract of the social renting of living accommodation shall be concluded on the grounds and 
conditions and in the order, provided for by the housing legislation. The rules of Articles 674, 675, 678, 
680, and Items 1-3 of Article 685 of this Code shall be applicable to the contract of the social renting of 
living accommodation, unless otherwise stipulated by the housing legislation. 
Article 673. The Object of the Contract of Renting Living Accommodation 
1. Isolated living accommodation suitable for permanent residence (the apartment, dwelling house, 
part of the apartment or dwelling house). 
The fitness of living accommodation for residence shall be determined in the order, provided for by 
the housing legislation. 
2. The tenant of living quarters in a tenement shall have the right to use property, indicated in 
Article 290 of this Code, in addition to the use of living accommodation. 
Article 674. The Form of the Contract of Renting Living Accommodation 
The contract of renting living accommodation shall be concluded in writing. 
Article 675. The Preservation of the Contract of Renting Living 
Accommodation When the Right of Ownership of Living Quarters Is Transferred 
The transfer of the right of ownership of living quarters under the contract of renting living 
accommodation shall not involve the dissolution or charge of the contract of renting living 
accommodation. In this case the new owner shall become a renter on the terms of the contract of renting 
concluded earlier. 
Article 676. The Obligations of the Renter of Living Quarters 
1. The renter shall be obliged to transfer to the tenant free living quarters in a condition suitable for 
residence. 
2. The renter shall be obliged to carry on proper exploitation of the dwelling house, in which the 
leased living quarters are to be found, to provide public utilities or ensure their provision to the tenant for 
charge, to carry on the repair of the common property in the tenement and of devices for rendering 
communal services in the living quarters. 
Article 677. The Tenant and Individuals Permanently Residing with Him 
1. Only a private person may be a tenant under the contract of renting living accommodation. 
2. The contract shall indicate individuals permanently residing in living quarters together with the 
tenant. In the absence of such indication in the contract these individuals shall be moved in living quarters 
in accordance with the rules of Article 679 of this Code. 
Individuals permanently residing together with the tenant shall have equal rights in the use of living 
accommodation. The relations between the tenant and such individuals shall be determined by law. 
3. The tenant shall be liable to the renter for the actions of the individuals permanently residing 
together with him and violating the terms and conditions of the contract of renting living accommodation. 
4. Individuals permanently residing together with the tenant may be notifying the renter conclude 
with the tenant a contract to the effect that all the individuals permanently residing in living quarters bear 
with the tenant joint and several liability to the renter. In this case such individuals shall be co-tenants. 
Article 678. The Obligations of the Tenant of Living Quarters 
The tenant shall be obliged to make use of living quarters for residence only, to preserve them and 
maintain them in proper condition. 
The tenant shall have no right to reconstruct living quarters without the renter's consent. 
The tenant shall be obliged to make payment for living accommodation. Unless otherwise stipulated 
by the contract, the tenant shall be obliged to make utility rates on his own. 
Federal Law No. 189-FZ of December 29, 2004 amended Article 679 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
Article 679. The Moving-in of Individuals Permanently Residing with the 
Tenant 
Other individuals may be moved in living quarters with the consent of the renter, tenant and 
individuals permanently residing with him in the capacity of permanently residents. No consent shall be 
required in case of moving in minors. 
The moving-in shall be allowed with the observance of the requirements of legislation on the norm 
of the dwelling premises total useful floor area per person, except for the case of moving in minors. 
Federal Law No. 189-FZ of December 29, 2004 amended Article 680 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
Article 680. Temporary Lodgers 
The tenant and the individuals permanently residing with him shall have the right to permit 
temporary lodgers (users) to live free of charge in their living quarters by common agreement and with 
the preliminary notification of the renter. The renter may ban the living of temporary lodgers with the 
observance of the requirements of legislation on the norm of the dwelling premises total useful floor area 
per person. The period of living of temporary lodgers may not exceed six months. 
Temporary lodgers shall not possess the independent right of using living quarters. The tenant shall 
be responsible for their actions to the renter. 
Temporary lodgers shall be obliged to vacate living quarters upon the expiry of the period of 
residence agreed upon with them, and if this period is not agreed upon, they shall be obliged to vacate 
living quarters within seven days since the day of making the respective demand by the tenant or any 
individual permanently residing with him. 
Article 681. Repairs of the Leased Living Quarters 
1. It shall be the duty of the tenant to carry out current repairs of leased living quarters, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the contract of renting living accommodation. 
2. It shall be the duty of the renter to carry out major repairs of leased living quarters, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the contract of renting living accommodation. 
3. It shall not be allowed to re-equip the dwelling house in which living quarters are to be found, if 
this re-equipment substantially change the conditions of using living quarters, without the consent of the 
tenant. 
Article 682. Payment for Living Quarters 
1. The amount of the payment for living quarters shall be fixed by agreement between the parties in 
the contract of renting living quarters. If a maximum payment for living quarters has been fixed in 
accordance with the law, the payment provided for by the contract shall not exceed this amount. 
2. It shall not be allowed to change the payment for living quarters unilaterally, except for the cases 
provided for by the law or the contract. 
3. Payment for living quarters shall be made by the tenant within the periods of time, envisaged by 
the contract of renting living accommodation. If the contract does not provide for time-limits, payment 
shall be made by the tenant every month in the order, prescribed by the Housing Code of the Russian 
Federation. 
Article 683. The Time-limit in the Contract of Renting Living Accommodation 
1. A contract of renting living accommodation shall be concluded for a term that does not exceed 
five years. If the contract does not fix the term, the contract shall be deemed to be concluded for five 
years. 
2. The rules, envisaged by Item 2 of Article 677, Articles 680, 684-686, the fourth paragraph of Item 
2 of Article 687 of this Code shall not be applied to the contract of renting living accommodation, 
concluded for a term of one year (short-term renting), unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
Article 684. The Preferential Right of the Tenant to Conclude a Contract for a 
New Term 
With the lapse of the term of the contract of renting living quarters the tenant shall have the 
preferential right to conclude a contract of renting living accommodation for a new term. 
Not later than three months before the expiry of the term of the contract of renting living quarters 
the renter shall propose that the tenant conclude a contract on the same or other conditions or warn the 
tenant about the refusal to prolong the contract in connection with the decision of not letting on lease 
living quarters during the period of not less than a year. If the renter has failed to perform this obligation, 
while the tenant has not refused to prolong the contract, the latter shall be deemed to be extended on the 
same conditions and for the same period. 
When the terms and conditions of the contract are being coordinated, the tenant shall have no right 
to demand that the number of persons permanently residing with him under the contract of renting living 
accommodation should be increased. 
If the renter has refused to prolong the contract in connection with the decision not to let premises 
on lease, but during one year since the day of the expiry of the validity term of the contract with the 
tenant has concluded the contract of renting living accommodation with another person, the tenant shall 
have the right to demand that this contract should be recognized as invalid and/or that compensation 
should be made for the losses caused by the refusal to renew the contract with him. 
Article 685. Sustenance of Living Quarters 
1. Under the contract for sustenance of living quarters the tenant shall transfer for a term all the 
rented premise or the part thereof in use by subtenant with the consent of the renter. The subtenant shall 
not acquire the independent right of using living quarters. The tenant shall remain to be liable to the renter 
under the contract of renting living accommodation. 
Federal Law No. 189-FZ of December 29, 2004 amended Item 2 of Article 685 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
2. A contract for sustenance of living quarters may be concluded on condition that the requirements 
of legislation on the norm of the dwelling premises total useful floor area per person should be met. 
3. The contract for sustenance of living quarters shall be payable. 
4. The validity term of the contract for sustenance of living quarters may not exceed the validity 
term of the contract of renting living quarters. 
5. In case of the termination of the contract of renting living quarters short of the term, the contract 
for sustenance of living quarters shall cease simultaneously with it. 
6. The rules for the preferential right to the conclusion of a contract for a new term shall not extend 
to the contract for sustenance of living quarters. 
Article 686. The Replacement of the Tenant in the Contract of Renting Living 
Accommodation 
1. On the demand of the tenant and other private persons permanently residing with him and with 
the consent of the renter the tenant in the contract of renting living accommodation may be replaced by 
one of the persons of age permanently residing together with the tenant. 
2. In the event of the tenant's death or of his retirement from living quarters, the contract shall 
continue to operate on the same conditions, and one of the private persons permanently residing with the 
former tenant shall become a tenant by general agreement between them. If such agreement is not 
reached, all the individuals permanently residing in living quarters shall become co-tenants. 
Article 687. The Dissolution of the Contract of Renting Living Quarters 
1. With the consent of other persons permanently residing with him the tenant of living quarters 
shall have the right to cancel the contract of renting with the written warning of the renter three months 
beforehand. 
2. A contract of renting living quarters may be dissolved in due course of law on the demand of the 
renter in the cases of: 
the non-deposition by the tenant of payment for living quarters for six months, unless the contract 
fixes a longer period, and in case of short-term renting when payment has not been made for more than 
two times upon the expiry of the term of payment fixed by the contract; 
the destruction of, or damage to, the premise by the tenant or other persons for whose actions he is 
answerable. 
By the court's decision the tenant may be granted the period of one year for the removal by him of 
the breaches that served as a ground for the dissolution of the contract of renting living accommodation. 
If during the period of time, fixed by a court of law, the tenant does not remove the breaches or does not 
take all the necessary measures to eliminate them, the court shall make a decision on the dissolution of the 
contract of renting living accommodation in reply to the repeated application of the renter. In this case, at 
the request of the tenant the court may postpone the execution of its decision for a term of not more than a 
year in its decision on the dissolution of the contract. 
3. A contract of renting living accommodation may be dissolved by a court of law on the demand of 
any party to the contract: 
if the premise ceases to be suitable for permanent residence, and also in case of its fault; 
in other cases, provided for by the housing legislation. 
4. If the tenant of living quarters or other private persons for whose actions he is answerable make 
use of living quarters not to its purpose or systematically violate the rights and interests of neighbours, the 
renter may warn the tenant about the need to remove these breaches. 
If the tenant or other persons, for the actions of which he is answerable, continue to make use of 
living quarters after the warning not to the purpose or to breach the rights and interests of neighbours, the 
tenant shall have the right to dissolve the contract of renting living accommodation judicially. In this case, 
the rules, provided for by the fourth paragraph of Item 2 of this Article, shall be applied. 
Article 688. The Consequences of the Dissolution of the Contract of Renting 
Living Accommodation 
In case of the dissolution of the contract of renting living accommodation the tenant and other 
persons living in these living quarters by the time of the cancellation of the contract shall be subject to 
eviction on the basis of the court's decision. 
Chapter 36. Gratuitous Use 
Article 689. Contract for Gratuitous Use 
1. Under the contract for gratuitous use (loan agreement) one party (lender) shall undertake to 
transfer a thing or transfers it in gratuitous use by the other party (borrower), while the latter shall 
undertake to return the same thing in the condition in which it received it with due account for normal 
depreciation or in the condition stipulated by the contract. 
2. The rules of Article 607, Item 1 and Paragraph 1 of Item 2 of Article 610, Items 1 and 3 of Article 
615, Item 2 of Article 621, Items 1 and 3 of Article 623 of this Code shall be accordingly applicable to the 
contract for gratuitous use. 
Article 690. The Lender 
1. The right of transferring a thing in gratuitous use shall belong to it owner and other persons 
authorized therefor by the law or by the owner. 
2. A non-profit organization shall have no right to transfer property in gratuitous use by the person 
who is its founder, partner, manager, member of its management or control bodies. 
Article 691. The Giving of a Thing in Gratuitous Use 
1. The lender shall be obliged to give a thing in the condition that corresponds to the terms of the 
contract for gratuitous use and its purpose. 
2. A thing shall be given for gratuitous use with all its accessories and related documents 
(instructions on its use, technical certificate, etc.), unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
If such accessories and documents have not been given, and without them the thing can not be used 
according to its designation or its use is largely responsible for the loss of its value for the lender, the 
latter shall have the right to demand such accessories and documents or the cancellation of the contract 
and the indemnity for the real loss. 
Article 692. The Consequences of Failure to Give a Thing in Gratuitous Use 
If the lender fails to give a thing to the borrower, the latter shall have the right to demand the 
cancellation of the contract for gratuitous use and the indemnity for the real loss. 
Article 693. Liability for the Defects of the Thing Given for Gratuitous Use 
1. The lender shall be liable for the defects of the thing which he deliberately or because of gross 
negligence did not specify during the conclusion of the contract for gratuitous use. 
In case of discovery of such defects the borrower shall have the right to demand from the lender at 
his option the gratuitous removal of the defects of the thing or the reimbursement of his expenses on the 
removal of the defects of the thing, or the anticipatory cancellation of the contract and the indemnity for 
the real loss. 
2. The lender, being informed about the claims of the borrower or about his intention to eliminate 
the defects of the thing at the expense of the lender, may replace without delay the faulty thing by another 
similar thing in a proper condition. 
3. The lender shall not be liable for the defects of the thing which were specified by him during the 
conclusion of the contract or had been known in advance to the borrower, or should have been discovered 
by the borrower during the inspection of the thing or the verification of its good condition during the 
conclusion of the contract or the transfer of the thing. 
Article 694. The Rights of Third Persons to the Thing Transferred for 
Gratuitous Use 
The transfer of a thing for gratuitous use shall not be a ground for the alteration or termination of the 
rights of third persons to this thing. 
During the conclusion of a contract for gratuitous use the lender shall be obliged to warn the 
borrower about all the rights of third persons to this thing (servitude, the right of the pawning of the thing, 
etc.). Default on this obligation shall entitle the borrower to demand the dissolution of the contract and the 
indemnity for the real loss. 
Article 695. The Obligation of the Borrower to Maintain a Thing 
The borrower shall be obliged to maintain the thing received for gratuitous use in a good condition, 
including to effect minor and major repairs and to bear all the expenses on its maintenance, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the contract for gratuitous use. 
Article 696. The Risk of Accidental Destruction of, or Accidental Damage to, 
the Thing 
The borrower shall bear the risk of accidental destruction of, or accidental damage to, the thing 
received for gratuitous use, if the thing has been destroyed or become faulty in view of the fact that he 
used it out of accordance with the contract for gratuitous use or its purpose, or has transferred the thing to 
a third person without the lender's consent. The borrower shall also bear the risk of accidental destruction 
of, or accidental damage to, the thing, if with due account of actual circumstances he could prevent its 
destruction or damage by sacrificing his thing but has preferred to preserve his thing. 
Article 697. Liability for the Harm Inflicted on the Third Person As a Result of 
the Use of a Thing 
The lender shall be liable for the harm inflicted on the third person as a result of the use of a thing, 
unless he proves that the harm was caused in consequence of intent or gross negligence on the part of the 
borrower or the person who is in possession of this thing with the lender's consent. 
Article 698. The Cancellation of the Contract for Gratuitous Use Short of the 
Term 
1. The lender shall have the right to demand that the contract for gratuitous use should be cancelled 
short of the term in cases where the borrower: 
uses the thing out of accordance with the contract or with its designation; 
fails to discharge the obligation of keeping the thing in good condition or of maintaining it; 
substantially worsens the condition of the thing; 
has handed over the thing to a third person without the lender's consent. 
2. The borrower shall have the right to demand to anticipatory cancellation of the contract for 
gratuitous use in the following cases: 
if defects have been discovered that makes impossible or burdensome the normal use of the thing 
and, moreover he did not know about them and could not know about them at the time of the conclusion 
of the contract; 
if the thing proves to be in a condition unsuitable for its use by reason of circumstances for which he 
is not answerable; 
if during the conclusion of the contract the lender did not warn him about the rights of third persons 
to the thing being handed over to them; 
if the lender has failed to discharge the obligation of handing over the thing or its accessories and 
related documents. 
Article 699. Repudiation of the Contract for Gratuitous Use 
1. Each party to the contract shall have the right to repudiate at any time the contract for gratuitous 
use, concluded without an indication of its validity term, by informing the other party one month in 
advance, unless the contract stipulates a different date of notification. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract, the borrower shall have the right to repudiate at any 
time the contract, concluded with an indication of its validity term, in the procedure, envisaged by Item 1 
of this Article. 
Article 700. The Change of the Parties to the Contract for Gratuitous Use 
1. The lender shall have the right to alienate a thing or to hand it over for lucrative use to a third 
person. In this case, the new owner or user shall receive the rights under the contract for gratuitous use, 
concluded earlier, while his rights to the thing shall be encumbered with the rights of the borrower. 
2. In case of the lender's death or the reorganization or liquidation of the lending legal entity, the 
rights and obligations of the lender under the contract for gratuitous use shall pass on to the heir (legal 
successor) or to the other person to whom the right of ownership of the thing or another right, on the basis 
of which the thing was handed over for gratuitous use, has been transferred. 
In case of the reorganization of the lending legal entity its rights and obligations under the contract 
shall pass to the legal entity which is its legal successor, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
Article 701. The Termination of the Contract for Gratuitous Use 
The contract for gratuitous use shall cease in case of the borrower's death or the liquidation of the 
borrowing legal entity, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
Chapter 37. Contract of Hiring Work 
_1. General Provisions on Contract of 
Hiring Work 
Article 702. Contract of Work and Labour 
1. Under the work and labour contract one party (contractor) shall undertake to perform definite 
work according to the assignment of the other party (customer) and to turn it over to the customer, 
whereas the customer shall undertake to accept the result of this work and to pay for it. 
2. The provisions envisaged by this paragraph shall be applied to the individual types of the work 
and labour contract (domestic contract, building contract, contract for the performance of design and 
survey works, contract works for state needs), unless otherwise stipulated by the rules of this Code for 
these types of contracts. 
Article 703. Works Performed Under the Contract of Work and Labour 
1. A contract of work and labour shall be concluded for the manufacture or processing of a thing or 
for the performance of another work with the transfer of its result to the customer. 
2. Under the contract of work and labour, concluded for the manufacture of a thing, the contractor 
shall transfer the rights to it to the customer. 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract, the contractor shall determine methods of performing 
the customer's assignment on his own. 
Article 704. Performance of Work by the Contractor's Maintenance 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the work and labour contract, the work shall be performed by the 
contractor's maintenance - from his materials and with his own forces and means. 
2. The contractor shall bear liability for improper quality of materials and equipment supplied by 
him, and also for the provision of materials and equipment, encumbered with the rights of third persons. 
Article 705. The Distribution of Risks Between the Parties 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by this Code, other laws or the contract of work and labour, 
the risk of accidental destruction of, or accidental damage to, materials, equipment, the things or 
assets used for the execution of the contract, transferred for processing, shall be borne by the party that 
has extended them; 
the risk of accidental destruction of, or accidental damage to, the result of the performed work 
before it is accepted by the customer shall be borne by the contractor. 
2. In case of delay in the delivery and acceptance of the result of work the risks, specified in Item 1 
of this Article, shall be borne by the part which has made this delay. 
Article 706. The General Contractor and the Subcontractor 
1. Unless the obligation of the subcontractor to perform personally the work, envisaged by the 
contract, follows from the law or the work and labour contract, the contractor shall have the right to draw 
other persons (subcontractors) in the execution of his obligations. In this case the contractor shall play the 
part of the general contractor. 
2. The contractor who has drawn a subcontractor in the execution of the work and labour contract in 
contravention of the provisions of Item 1 of this Article or the contract shall bear liability to the customer 
for the losses caused by the subcontractor's participation in the execution of the contract. 
3. The general contractor shall bear liability to the customer for the consequences of the non
discharge or improper discharge of the obligations by the subcontractor in keeping with the rules of Item 
1 of Article 313 and Article 403 of this Code and shall bear liability to the subcontractor for the non
fulfilment or improper fulfilment of the obligations by the customer under the work and labour contract. 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the contract, the customer and the subcontractor shall not 
have the right to make to each other claims relating to the breach of the contracts, concluded by each of 
them with the general contractor. 
4. With the general contractor's consent the customer shall have the right to conclude contracts for 
the performance of individual works with other persons. In this case the said persons shall bear liability 
directly to the customer for the non-performance or improper performance of work. 
Article 707. The Participation of Several Persons in the Performance of Work 
1. If two or more persons act simultaneously on the side of the contractor, they shall be recognized 
in case of indivisibility of the subject-matter of the obligation as joint and several debtors with regard to 
the customer and accordingly as joint and several creditors. 
2. In the event of the divisibility of the subject-matter of the obligation, and also in other cases, 
provided for by the law, other legal acts or the contract, each person, referred to in Item 1 of this Article, 
shall acquire rights and bear obligations with regard to the customer within the limits of their share 
(Article 321). 
Article 708. The Dates of the Performance of the Work 
1. The work and labour contract shall indicate the initial and deadline expiry dates of the 
performance of work. By agreement between the parties the contract may also provide for the dates of 
completing in particular stages of the work concerned (interim dates). 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the law, other legal acts or the contract, the contractor shall bear 
liability for breaking both the initial or ultimate and interim dates of the performance of the work 
concerned. 
2. The initial, ultimate and interim dates of the performance of the work may be changed in cases 
and in the order, rescribed by the contract. 
Federal Law No. 213-FZ of December 17, 1999 amended Item 3 of Article 708 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
3. The consequences of delay in execution, referred to in Item 2 of Article 405 of this Code shall 
ensue in case of breaking the ultimate date of the performance of the work concerned, and also of other 
times established by the work contract. 
Article 709. The Price of the Work 
1. The work and labour contract shall indicate the price of the work subject to performance or the 
methods of its estimation. If there is no such indication in the contract, the price of the work shall be 
estimated in accordance with Item 3 of Article 424 of this Code. 
2. The price in the work and labour contract shall include compensation for the contractor's costs 
and the remuneration due to him. 
3. The price of the work may be estimated by means of drawing up its estimate. 
In the event the work is performed in accordance with the estimate made by the contractor, the 
estimate shall acquire the force and become a part of the work and labour contract since the time of its 
confirmation by the customer. 
4. The price of the work (estimate) may be approximate or firm. In the absence of other references 
in the work and labour contract the price of the work shall be deemed to be firm. 
5. If there is a need for additional works and for this reason for a substantial excess of the price of 
the work estimated approximately, the contractor shall be obliged to warn the customer in due time about 
this. The customer who has not given his consent to the price of the work, indicated in the work and 
labour contract shall have the right to repudiate the contract. In this case the contractor may demand that 
the customer should pay the price for the performed part of the work. 
The contractor who has not warned the customer in due time about the need of exceeding the price 
of the work, indicated in the contract, shall be obliged to fulfil the contract and retain the right to the 
payment for the work at the price specified in the contract. 
6. The contractor shall have no right to demand an increase in the firm price, whereas the customer 
shall have no right to demand its decrease, including in the event when at the time of concluding the work 
and labour contract the possibility was excluded to make provision for the full scope of works subject to 
performance or of the expenses needed for this. 
In the event of the substantial increase in the case of materials and equipment provided by the 
contractor, and also of the services rendered to him by third persons, which cannot be foreseen during the 
conclusion of the contract, the contractor shall have the right to demand an increase in the fixed price, and 
should the customer refuse to meet this demand, he shall have the right to demand the dissolution of the 
contract in accordance with Article 451 of this Code. 
Article 710. The Saving of the Contractor 
1. When the contractor's actual expenses prove to be less than those reckoned in the estimation of 
the price of the work, the contractor shall retain the right to the payment for works at the price, envisaged 
by the work and labour contract, unless the customer proves that the saving obtained by the contractor has 
influenced the quality of the performed works. 
2. the work and labour contract may provide for the distribution of the saving obtained by the 
contractor among the parties thereto. 
Article 711. Procedure of the Payment for the Work 
1. If the work and labour contract does not provide for apreliminary payment for the fulfilled work 
or of its particular stages, the customer shall be obliged to pay to the contractor the specified price after 
the final delivery of the results of the work, provided that the work has been performed properly and 
within the agreed period or short of the term with the consent of the customer. 
2. The contractor shall have the right to demand the advance or earnest money only in cases and in 
the amount, indicated in the law or in the work and labour contract. 
Article 712. The Contractor's Right to Retention 
In the event of default on the customer's obligation to pay the fixed price or any other sum of money 
due to the contractor in connection with the performance of the work and labour contract, the contractor 
shall have the right, in keeping with Articles 359 and 360 of this Code, to the retention of the results of 
the work, and also the equipment belonging to the customer, the thing transferred for processing, the 
remainder of the unused material and other property of the customer, turned out at his disposal before the 
payment of relevant sums of money by the customer. 
Article 713. The Performance of the Work with the Use of the Customer's 
Material 
1. The contractor shall be obliged to make economical and thrifty use of the material supplied by the 
customer, submit after the completion of the work to the customer his report on the spending of the 
material, and also to return its remainder or to reduce the price of the work with the customer's consent 
and with account of the value of the unused material that remains at the contractor's disposal. 
2. If no result has been achieved or the achieved result has shortcomings which make it unfit for the 
use specified by the work and labour contract or by the usual use in the absence of the appropriate 
condition in the contract for reasons caused by the shortcomings of the material, supplied by the 
customer, the contractor shall have the right to demand payment for the work dome by him. 
3. The contractor may exercise the right, indicated in Item 2 of this Article, if he proves that the 
material's shortcomings could not be discovered in the event of a proper acceptance of this material by the 
contractor. 
Article 714. The Contractor's Liability for the Non-safety of Property Supplied 
by the Contractor 
The contractor shall bear liability for the non-safety of the materials, equipment supplied by the 
customer, of things and other property transferred for processing (treatment) and possessed by the 
contractor in connection with the execution of the work and labour contract. 
Article 715. The Rights of the Customer During the Performance of the Work 
by the Contractor 
1. The customer shall have the right to verify at any time the progress and quality of the work 
performed by the contractor, while not interfering in his activity. 
2. If the contractor does not embark on the execution of the work and labour contract or performs 
the work so slowly that it is obviously impossible to finish it by the time fixed, the customer shall have 
the right to refuse to execute the contract and to claim damages. 
3. If it becomes obvious during the performance of the work that it will not be performed properly, 
the customer shall have the right to appoint a reasonable date for the removal of shortcomings and in case 
of default of this requirement by the contractor in the appointed time to waive the work and labour 
contract or to entrust another person with the correction of the work at the expense of the contractor, and 
also to claim damages. 
Article 716. The Circumstances About Which the Contractor Shall Be Obliged 
to Warn the Customer 
1. The contractor shall be obliged to warn the customer without delay and to suspend the work 
before he receives his directions in the event of the discovery of: 
the unsuitability or the substandard quality of the customer's materials, equipment, technical 
documents or the thing delivered for processing (treatment); 
possible favourable consequences of the implementation of the customer's directions on the method 
of performing the work; 
other circumstances beyond the contractor's control, which endanger the fitness or the stability of 
the results of the work being performed or make it impossible to finish this work on time. 
2. The contractor, who has failed to warn the customer about the circumstances, indicated in Item 1 
of this Article or who has continued the work without waiting for the expiry of the date, referred to in the 
contract, and in its absence without waiting the expiry of the reasonable period for a reply to the warning 
or despite the timely indication of the customer concerning the discontinuance of the work, shall have no 
right to refer to said corresponding in the event of the presentation of appropriate claims to him or by him 
to the customer. 
3. If despite the timely and justified warning by the contractor about the circumstances, referred to 
in Item 1 of this Article, the customs fails to replace within the reasonable time the unfit and substandard 
materials, equipment, technical documents or the thing transferred for processing (treatment), does not 
change the directions on the method of performing the work or does not take other necessary measures to 
remove the circumstances threatening its fitness, the contractor shall have the right to refuse to execute 
the work and labour contract and claim the damages caused by the termination of the contract. 
Article 717. The Customer's Refusal to Execute the Work and Labour Contract 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the work and labour contract, the customer may at any time before 
the delivery of the result of the work to him refuse the execute the contract by paying to the contractor a 
part of the fixed price in proportion to the part of the work performed before the receipt of the notice 
about the refusal of the customer to implement the contract. The customer shall also be obliged to 
compensate the contractor's losses, caused by the termination of the work and labour contract, within the 
limits of the difference between the price fixed for the entire work and the part of the price paid put for 
the performed work. 
Article 718. The Customer's Assistance 
1. In cases, in the scope and in the order, provided for by the work and labour contract, the customer 
shall be obliged to assist the contractor in the performance of the work. 
In case of default on this duty by the customer the contractor shall have the right to claim damages, 
including additional costs caused by downtime or by putting off the dates of the performance of the work, 
or by the increase in the price of the work, indicated in the contract. 
2. In cases where it has become impossible to perform the work under the work and labour contract 
owing to the customer's actions or omission, the contractor shall have the right to pay the price, indicated 
in the contract, with account of the performed part of the work. 
Article 719. Default on the Customer's Reciprocal Obligations Under the Work 
and Labour Contract 
1. The contractor shall have the right not to proceed to the work or to suspend the work he began in 
cases where the breach by the customer of his obligations under the work and labour contract, in 
particular, the non-supply of materials, equipment, technical documents or the thing subject to processing 
(treatment), prevents the execution of the contract by the contractor, and also in the presence of the 
circumstances evidencing that the said circumstances will not be discharged in the fixed period (Article 
328). 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the work and labour contract, the contractor shall have the right to 
refuse the execute the contract and to claim damages in the presence of circumstances, referred to in Item 
1 of this Article. 
Article 720. The Acceptance by the Customer of the Work Fulfilled by the 
Contractor 
1. Within the time-limit and in the order, provided for by the work and labour contract, the customer 
shall be obliged to inspect with the contractor's participation the result of the work and to accept the 
performed work; in the event of the discovery of departures from the contract that worsen the result of the 
work or of any other shortcomings in the work, the customer shall be obliged to state at once about this to 
the contractor. 
2. The customer who has discovered shortcomings in the work during its acceptance shall have the 
right to refer to them in cases where the deed or any other document testifying to the acceptance has 
specified these shortcomings or the possibility of a subsequent presentation of the claim about their 
removal. 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the work and labour contract, the customer who has accepted the 
work without its check shall be deprived of the right to refer to the shortcomings in the work which could 
be ascertained in the usual method of its acceptance (obvious shortcomings). 
4. The customer who has discovered in the work after its acceptance departures from the work and 
labour contract or other defects which could not be identified by the usual method of acceptance (latent 
defects), including those that were deliberately hidden by the contractor, shall be obliged to inform the 
contractor about this within the reasonable period upon their discovery. 
5. In case a dispute has arisen between the customer and the contractor over the defects of the 
fulfilled work or their causes, an expert examination shall be scheduled. Expenses on the expert 
examination shall be borne by the contractor, except for the cases when experts have found out that there 
are no breaches by the contractor of the work and labour contract or a causal relationship between the 
contractor's actions and the discovered defects. In said cases the expenses on the expert examination shall 
be borne by the party which has called for the schedule of the expert examination, and if was scheduled 
by agreement between the parties, the expenses shall be borne by the parties in equal shares. 
6. Unless otherwise stipulated by the work and labour contract, in event of the customer's evasion 
from the acceptance of the fulfilled work, the contractor shall have the right, upon the expiry of one 
month since the day when as per the contract the result of the work should have been turned over to the 
customer, provided the latter makes subsequently two warnings of the customer to sell the result of the 
work and to place the avails, minus all the payments due to the contractor, on the customer's deposit in 
the procedure, provided for by Article 327 of this Code. 
7. If the evasion of the customer from the acceptance of the fulfilled work has involved a delay in 
the delivery of the work, the risk of accidental destruction of the thing manufactured (processed or 
treated) shall be recognized as passed to the customer at the time when the transfer of the thing should 
have taken place. 
Article 721. The Quality of the Work 
1. The quality of the work performed by the contractor shall correspond to the terms and conditions 
of the contract and in the absence or in the event of the incompleteness of these terms and conditions - to 
the requirements usually made to the work of appropriate kind. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law, 
other legal acts or the contract, the result of the fulfilled work shall possess, at the time of its transfer to 
the customer, the properties, referred to in the contract, or determined by the usually made requirements 
and shall be suitable within a reasonable period for the use, stipulated by the contract, for the usual use of 
the result of the work of this kind. 
2. If the law or other legal acts provide in the statutory manner for mandatory requirements for the 
work to be performed under the work and labour contract, the contractor acting as a businessman shall be 
obliged to perform the work by observing these mandatory requirements. 
The contractor may assume under the contract the obligation of fulfilling the work that meets the 
requirements for quality higher than the requirements made obligatory for the parties. 
Article 722. The Guarantee of the Quality of the Work 
1. In case where the law, other legal acts, the work and labour contract or the customs of business 
turnover provides for a guarantee period for the result of the work, the result of the work shall correspond 
to the terms and conditions of the contract for quality during the entire guarantee period (Item 1 of Article 
721). 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the work and labour contract, the guarantee of the quality of the 
result of the work shall extend to all the components of the result of the work. 
Article 723. The Contractor's Liability for Improper Quality of the Work 
1. In cases where the work has been performed by the contractor with departures from the work and 
labour contract which have worsened the result of the work or with other defects which make it unsuitable 
for the use, envisaged by the contract, or in the absence of the relevant condition of unfitness for the usual 
use in the contract, the customer shall have the right, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the 
contract, to demand from the contractor the following actions at his option: 
gratuitous removal of defects within the reasonable period; 
an adequate reduction of the price fixed for the work; 
reimbursement of his expenses incurred in the elimination of defects, when the customer's right to 
remove them is provided for by the work and labour contract (Article 397). 
2. Instead of the removal of the defects for which he is responsible the contractor shall have the right 
to perform gratis the work anew with the compensation to the customer of the losses caused by the delay 
in the execution of the work. In this case the customer shall be obliged to return the result of the work to 
the contractor, if such return is possible according to the nature of the work. 
3. If departures in the work from the terms and conditions of the work and labour contract or any 
other shortcomings of the result of the work have not been eliminated in the reasonable period or are 
substantial and unremovable, the customer shall have the right to refuse to execute the contract and claim 
damages. 
4. The proviso of the work and labour contract about the release of the contractor from the liability 
for definite shortcomings shall not absolve him from the liability, if it is proved that such shortcomings 
have arisen due to the contractor's faulty actions or inaction. 
5. The contractor who has submitted materials for the fulfilment of the work is responsible for their 
quality under the rules for the seller's liability for substandard goods (Article 475). 
Article 724. The Terms of Discovery of the Result of the Work of Improper 
Value 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the work and labour contract, the customer shall have 
the right to make claims relating to the improper quality of the result of the work, provided that it was 
discovered during the period of time, fixed by this Article. 
2. In case where no guarantee period is fixed for the result of the work, claims relating to the 
shortcomings of the result of the work may be made by the customer, provided they have been disclosed 
during the reasonable period, but within two years since the day of the delivery of the result of the work, 
unless different time-limits have been fixed by the law, the contract or the customs of business turnover. 
3. The customer shall have the right to make claims, associated with the shortcomings in the result 
of the work, discovered during the guarantee period. 
4. In case where the guarantee period provided for by the contract is less then two years and the 
shortcomings of the result of the work have been discovered by the customer upon the expiry of the 
guarantee period but within two years since the time envisaged by Item 5 of this Article, the contractor 
shall bear liability, if the customer proves that the shortcomings arose before the delivery of the result of 
the work to the customer or for reasons that arose before this time. 
5. Unless otherwise stipulated by the work and labour contract, the guarantee period (Item 1 of 
Article 722) shall begin to run since the time when the result of the fulfilled work was accepted or should 
have accepted by the customer. 
6. The rules contained in Items 2 and 4 of Article 471 of this Code shall be applied to the 
computation of the guarantee period under the work and labour contract, unless otherwise stipulated by 
the law, other legal acts, the agreement of the parties or unless the contrary follows from the specifics of 
the work and labour contract. 
Article 725. The Statute of Limitation for the Improper Quality of the Work 
1. The period of limitation for claims made in connection with the improper quality of the work, 
performed under the work and labour contract, shall be one year, which the period of limitation for 
buildings and structures shall be determined according to the rules of Article 196 of this Code. 
2. If under the work and labour contract the result of the work has been accepted in parts, the period 
of limitation shall begin to run since the day of the acceptance of the result of the work as a whole. 
3. If the law, other legal acts or the work and labour contract provide for a guarantee period and the 
statement of claim for the shortcomings of the result of the work has been made during the guarantee 
period, the period of limitation, referred to in Item 1 of this Article, shall run begin with the day of the 
statement for the shortcomings. 
Article 726. The Duty of the Contractor to Transfer Information to the 
Customer 
The contractor shall be obliged to transfer together with the result of the work information on the 
operation or any other use of the subject of the work and labour contract, if this is provided by the 
contract or if the nature of information is such that without it is impossible to make use of the result of the 
work for the purposes, indicated in the contract. 
Article 727. The Confidentiality of Information Received by the Parties 
If the party thanks to the discharge of its obligation under the work and labour contract has received 
from the other party information about new decisions and technical knowledge, including knowledge not 
protected by law, and also information that can be regarded as a commercial secret (Article 139), the 
party which has received such information shall have no right to communicate it to the third persons 
without the consent of the other party. 
The procedure and conditions for the use of such information shall be determined by the agreement 
of the parties. 
On protection of the confidentiality of information within the framework of civil-law relations, see 
Federal Law No. 98-FZ of July 29, 2004  
Article 728. The Return by the Contractor of the Property Transferred by the 
Customer 
In cases where the customer dissolves the work and labour contract on the basis of Item 2 of Article 
715 or Item 3 of Article 723 of this Code, the contractor shall be obliged to return the materials and 
equipment, supplied by the customer, the thing transferred for processing (treatment) and other property 
or to hand them over to the person indicated by the customer, and if this has proved to be impossible - to 
replace the value of the materials, equipment and other property. 
Article 729. The Consequences of the Termination of the Work and Labour 
Contract Before the Acceptance of the Result of the Work 
Should the work and labour contract cease to be valid on the grounds, provided for by the law or the 
contract, before the acceptance by the customer of the result of the work, performed by the contractor 
(Item 1 of Article 720), the customer shall have the right to demand the transfer to him of the result of the 
incomplete work with the compensation of the contractor's expenses. 
_ 2. The Domestic Contract 
Article 730. The Domestic Contract 
1. Under the domestic contract the contractor who carries on appropriate business shall undertake to 
perform the work assigned by the individual (customer) to satisfy the customer's household and other 
personal requirements, while the customs shall undertake to accept the work and to pay for it. 
2. The domestic contract is a public agreement (Article 426). 
3. The laws on the protection of the customers' rights and other legal acts adopted in accordance 
with them shall be applicable to the relations under the domestic contract which are not regulated by this 
Code. 
Article 731. The Guarantees of the Customer's Rights 
1. The contractor shall have no right to impose on the customer the inclusion of an additional work 
or service in the domestic contract. The customer shall have the right to refuse to pay for the work or 
service not specified by the contract. 
2. The customer shall have the right to refuse to execute the domestic contract at any time before the 
delivery of the work to him by paying to the contractor a part of the fixed price in proportion to the part of 
the work, performed before the notification about the waiver of the execution of the contract and by 
reimbursing the contractor's expenses incurred prior to this time for the purpose of the fulfilment of the 
contract, unless they form the said part of the price of the work. The terms and conditions of the contract 
which deprive the customer of this right shall be void. 
Article 732. The Provision to the Customer of Information about the Offered 
Work 
1. The contractor shall be obliged, before the conclusion of a domestic contract, to offer to the 
customer the necessary and trustworthy information about the offered work, its kinds and specific 
features, the price and the form of payment, and also to provide the customer with other information 
relating to the contract at his request. If this is of relevance due to the nature of the work, the contractor 
shall indicate to the customer the concrete person who will perform this work. 
Federal Law No. 213-FZ of December 17, 1999 amended Item 2 of Article 732 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
2. If the customer was not afforded the possibility of receiving immediately at the place of the 
conclusion of a consumer work contract the information on the work indicated in Item 1 of this Article, it 
may demand from the contractor the compensation for damages caused by ungrounded evasion to 
conclude the contract (Item 4 of Article 445). 
The customer may demand the cancellation of a concluded consumer work contract without 
payment for the work done and also the compensation for damages when, as a result of the 
incompleteness or inaccuracy of the information received from the contractor, a contract was concluded 
for the performance of work not having the characteristics that the consumer had in mind. 
The contractor that did not finish the customer the information on the work indicated in Item 1 of 
this Article shall bear responsibility also for the defects of the work which arose after its transfer due to 
the absence of such information therewith. 
Article 733. The Performance of the Work from the Contractor's Material 
1. If the work under the domestic contract is to be performed from the contractor's materials, the 
latter shall be paid by the customer during the conclusion of the contract in full or in part, indicated in the 
contract, with the final settlement at the time of the receipt by the customer of the work fulfilled by the 
contractor. 
In conformity with the contract the material may be supplied by the contractor on credit, including 
with the proviso of payment by the customer for the material by instalments. 
2. The change of the price of the contractor's material after the conclusion of the domestic contract 
shall involve no recalculation. 
Article 734. The Fulfilment of the Work from the Customer's Materials 
If the work under the domestic contract is fulfilled from the customer's materials, the receipt or any 
other document issued by the contractor to the customer during the conclusion of the contract shall 
indicate the exact name, description and price of the materials to be determined by the agreement of the 
parties. The estimation of the materials in the receipt or any other similar document may be subsequently 
disputed by the customer in court. 
Article 735. The Price and Payment for the Work 
The price of the work in the domestic contract shall be determined by the agreement of the parties 
and may not be higher than that fixed or regulated by the respective state bodies. The work shall be paid 
by the customer after it is finally delivered by the contractor. With the customer's consent the work may 
be paid by him during the conclusion of the contract in full or by giving an advance. 
Article 736. The Warning by the Customer about the Conditions of the Use of 
the Fulfilled Work 
In the event of the delivery of the work to the customer the contractor shall be obliged to inform him 
about the requirements to be observed for the effective and sage use of the result of the work, and also 
about the consequences possible for the customer himself and other persons in case of non-observance of 
the relevant requirements. 
Federal Law No. 213-FZ of December 17, 1999 amended Article 737 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 737. The Consequences of the Discovery of Shortcomings in the 
Fulfilled Work 
1. In case of discovery of defects at the time of acceptance of the result of the work or after its 
acceptance during the quarantee period, and is it has not been established, then during a reasonable period 
but not later than two years (for immovable property, five years) from the day of the acceptance of the 
result of the work, the customer may at its choice exercise one of the rights stipulated in Article 723 of 
this Code or demand the cost-free repeat performance of the work or compensation for the expenditures 
borne by it for the correction of the shortcomings with its own funds or by third persons. 
2. In case of discovery of essential defects of the result of the work the customer may raise a 
demand to the contractor for the cost-free removal of such defects if is proves that they arose before the 
acceptance of the result of the work by the customer or for reasons that arose before that moment. This 
demand may be raised by the customer if the indicated defects were discovered upon the expiry of two 
years (for immovable property, five years) from the day of the acceptance of the result of the work by the 
customer, but within the limits of the period of service established by for the result of the work or during 
ten years from the day of the acceptance of the result of the work by the customer if the period of service 
has not been established."; 
3. In case of default on the contractor's claim, referred to in Item 2 of this Article, the customer shall 
have the right during the same period to demand either the return of a part of the price paid for the work 
or the reimbursement of the expenses incurred in connection with the removal of the shortcomings by the 
customer with his own forces or with the help of third persons or refuse to perform the contract and 
demand the compensation for the inflicted losses. 
Article 738. The Consequences of the Customer's Failure to Appear to Receive 
the Result of the Work 
In the event the customer has failed to appear to receive the result of the fulfilled work or has 
evaded its acceptance, the contractor shall have the right to sell the result of the work at a reasonable 
price, while making a written warning of the customer, upon the expiry of two months since such warning 
and to place the avails, minus all the payments due to the contractor, on the deposit account in the order, 
prescribed by Article 327 of this Code. 
Article 739. The Customer's Rights in Case of Improper Fulfilment or Non
fulfilment of the Work under the Domestic Contract 
In the event of improper fulfilment or non-fulfilment of the work under the domestic contract the 
customer may avail himself of the rights, granted to the buyer in compliance with Articles 503-505 of this 
Code. 
_ 3. The Building Contract 
Article 740. The Building Contract 
1. Under the building contract the contractor shall undertake in the period stipulated by the contract 
to build by the assignment of the customer a project or to perform other construction works, whereas the 
customer shall undertake to create for the contractor requisite conditions for the performance of the 
works, to accept their result and pay the specified price. 
2. The building contract shall be concluded to build or reconstruct an enterprise or building 
(including a dwelling house), to erect any other project, and also to perform assembly, start-up and 
adjustment operations, and other works indissolubly related to the project concerned. The rules for the 
building contract shall be also applied to the works involved in the major repairs of buildings and 
structures, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
In cases provided for by the contract the contractor shall assume the duty of running the project after 
it has been accepted by the customer during the period indicated in the contract. 
3. In cases where under the building contract the contractor fulfils the works in order to meet the 
household and other personal needs of the individual (customer), the rules of the second paragraph of this 
Article on the customer's rights shall be accordingly applied to such contract. 
Article 741. The Allocation of Risk Between the Parties 
1. The risk of accidental destruction of, or accidental damage to, the building project, which makes 
up the subject of the building contract, shall be borne by the contractor before this project is accepted by 
the customer. 
2. If the building project is destroyed or damaged before the customer has accepted it owing to the 
substandard materials, supplied by the customer (details, structures), or equipment or owing to the 
execution of mistaken directions of the customer, the contractor shall have the right to demand the 
payment for all the cost of the works, specified by the estimate, provided that he has fulfilled the duties, 
envisaged by Item 1 of Article 716 of this Code. 
Article 742. The Insurance of the Building Project 
1. The building contract may provide for the duty of the party to insure appropriate risks if it runs 
the risk of accidental destruction of, or accidental damage to, the building project, materials, equipment 
and other assets, used in construction, or bears liability for the infliction of damage to other persons 
during construction. 
The party that bears the obligation for insurance shall present to the other party the proofs of the 
conclusion by it of the insurance contract on the terms, provided for by the building contract, including 
data on the insurer, the insurance sum and insured risks. 
2. Insurance shall not release the appropriate party from the duty of taking necessary measures to 
prevent the onset of an insured accident. 
Article 743. Technical Documentation and the Estimate 
1. The contract shall be obliged to carry on construction and the related works in accordance with 
the technical documents determining the scope and content of the works and other requirements made for 
them and with the estimate fixing the price of the works. 
In the absence of other directions the building contract implies that the contractor is obliged to 
perform all the works indicated in technical documents and the estimate. 
2. The building contract shall define the composition and content of technical documentation, and 
also provide which of the parties and by which date it should submit relevant documents. 
3. The contractor who has discovered in the process of construction the works which have not been 
recorded in technical documents and in this connection the need for additional works and for augmenting 
the detailed estimate of the cost of construction shall be obliged to inform the customer about this. 
If the contractor has failed to receive from the customer a reply to his information during 10 days, 
unless the law or the building contract provides for a different date, he shall be obliged to suspend the 
corresponding works and charge the losses caused by downtime to the customer's account. The customer 
shall be released from the compensation of these losses, if he proves that there is no need for additional 
works. 
4. The contractor who fails to discharge the obligation, established by Item 3 of this Article, shall be 
deprived of the right to demand from the customer the payment for the fulfilled additional works and the 
compensation for the relevant losses, unless he proves the need for immediate actions in the interests of 
the customer, particularly in connection with the fact that the suspension of the works could lead to the 
destruction of, or damage to, the building project. 
5. With the consent of the customer with the conduct and payment of additional works the 
contractor shall have the right to refuse to perform them only in cases where they do not enter in the 
sphere of the contractor's professional activity or cannot be performed by the contractor for reasons 
beyond his control. 
Article 744. Introduction of Changes to Technical Documentation 
1. The customer shall have the right to introduce changes to technical documentation, unless related 
additional works exceed in cost terms 10 per cent of the total estimate cost of construction and change the 
nature of the works, envisaged in the building contract. 
2. Changes shall be made in technical documentation in the scope greater than that, indicated in 
Item 1 of this Article, on the basis of the additional estimate agreed upon by the parties. 
3. The contractor shall be obliged in accordance with Article 450 of this Code to review the 
estimate, if the cost of the works has exceeded the estimate by not less than 10 per cent for the reasons 
beyond his control. 
4. The contractor shall have the right to demand the reimbursement of reasonable expenses incurred 
by him in connection with the ascertainment and removal of defects in technical documentation. 
Article 745. The Supply of Project Construction with Materials and Equipment 
1. The duty of supplying project construction with materials, including details and structures, or 
equipment shall be borne by the contractor, unless the building contract provides for the supply of 
construction as a whole or in certain part by the customer. 
2. The party which is obliged to supply project construction shall bear the liability for the revealed 
impossibility to make use of its supplied materials or equipment without the deterioration of the quality of 
the works being performed, unless he proves that their impossible use is due to the circumstances under 
the control of the other party. 
3. In case of the revealed impossibility of making use of the materials and equipment supplied by 
the customer without the deterioration of the quality of the works being performed and of the customer's 
refusal to replace them, the contractor shall have the right to waive the building contract and demand that 
the customer pay the price of the contract in proportion to the fulfilled part of the works. 
Article 746. The Payment for Works to Be Done 
1. The payment for the works done by the contractor shall be made by the customer in the amount 
provided for by the estimate within the time and in the order prescribed by the law or the building 
contract. In the absence of appropriate references in the law or the contract the payment for works shall be 
made in accordance with Article 711 of this Code. 
2. The building contract may provide for the payment for works in the lump and in full scope after 
the projects is accepted by the customer. 
Article 747. The Customer's Additional Obligations under the Building Contract 
1. The customer shall be obliged to provide in time a land plot for construction. The area and 
condition of the land plot to be provided shall correspond to the terms of the building contract and in the 
absence of such conditions shall ensure the timely start of the works, their normal performance and 
completion on due date. 
2. In cases and in the procedure, envisaged by the building contract the customer shall be obliged to 
convey to the contractor for use the buildings and structures necessary for the accomplishment of the 
works, to transport cargoes at his address, to lay out temporary networks of power, water and steam 
supply and render other services. 
3. Payments for the services rendered by the customer and indicated in Item 2 of this Article shall be 
made in cases and on the terms, provided for by the building contract. 
Article 748. Control and Supervision by the Customer over the Performance of 
Works Under the Building Contract 
1. The customer shall have the right to exercise control and supervision over the progress and 
quality of the works being performed, the observance of the period of their fulfilment (schedule), the 
quality of the materials supplied by the contractor, and also over the proper use by the contractor of the 
customer's materials without interfering in the day-to-day economic activity of the contractor. 
2. The customer who has discovered during his control and supervision over the performance of the 
works departures from the terms and conditions of the building contract, which may deteriorate the 
quality of the works, or any other shortcomings, shall be obliged to inform the contractor about this 
without delay. The customer who has failed to make such statement to the contractor shall forfeit his right 
to refer in future to the shortcomings he will detect. 
3. The contractor shall be obliged to implement the customer's directions, received during 
construction, unless such directions contradict the terms and conditions of the building contract and 
represent intervention in the day-to-day economic activity of the contractor. 
4. The contractor who has fulfilled the works improperly shall have no right to refer to the fact that 
the customer failed to exercise his control and supervision over their performance, except for the cases 
when the obligation to exercise such control and supervision has been placed on the customer by law. 
Article 749. The Participation of an Engineer (Engineering Organization) in the 
Exercise of the Rights and in the Discharge of the Obligations of the Customer 
For the purposes of exercising control and supervision over project construction and of adopting on 
his behalf of decisions in relations with the contractor the customer may conclude on his own, without the 
contractor's consent, a contract for the rendering of such services to the customer with the relevant 
engineer (engineering organization). In this case the building contract shall define the functions of such 
engineer (engineering organization), connected with the consequences of his actions for the contractor. 
Article 750. Cooperation of the Parties to the Building Contract 
1. If hindrances to the proper execution of the building contract come to the surface during project 
construction and the related works, each party shall be obliged to take all reasonable measures under its 
control in order to remove such hindrances. The party which has failed to discharge this obligation shall 
forfeit its right to claim damages caused by the failure to eliminate the relevant hindrances. 
2. The expenses of the party incurred in the discharge of the obligations, indicated in Item 1 of this 
Article, shall be subject to reimbursement by the other party in cases where this is stipulated by the 
building contract. 
Article 751. The Contractor's Obligations of Protecting the Environment and of 
Providing Safety for Building Works 
1. The contractor shall be obliged to observe the requirements of the law and other legal acts on 
environmental protection and safety of building works in the process of construction and the related 
works. 
The contractor shall bear liability for the breach of said requirements. 
2. The contractor shall have no right to use during the works being done the materials and 
equipment, supplied by the customer, or fulfil his directions, if they may lead to the breach of the 
requirements, obligatory for the parties, for the protection of the environment and the safety of building 
works. 
Article 752. The Consequences of the Laying-up of Project Construction 
If the works under the building contract have been suspended and the project construction has been 
laid-in for the reasons beyond the control of the parties, the customer shall be obliged to pay in full to the 
contractor for the works fulfilled up to the time of the laying-up of the work, and also to reimburse the 
expenses caused by the need to terminate the works and to lay-up the project construction with the offset 
of the benefits which the contractor has received or could receive due to the termination of the works. 
Article 753. The Delivery-Acceptance of Works 
1. The customer who has received the communication of the contractor about the delivery of the 
result of the works performed under the building contract or, if this is provided for by the contract, of the 
fulfilled stage of the works, shall be obliged to proceed to it acceptance. 
2. The customer shall organize and effect the acceptance of the result of the works at his own 
expense, unless otherwise stipulated by the building contract. 
In cases envisaged by the law or any other legal acts the representatives of state bodies and local 
self-government bodies shall take part in the acceptance of the result of the works. 
3. The customer who has accepted the result of a particular stage of the works shall bear the risk of 
the consequences of the destruction of, or damage to, the result of the works which have taken place not 
through the fault of the contractor. 
4. The delivery of the result of the works by the contractor and the acceptance of it by the customer 
shall be formalized by the certificate, signed by both parties. If one of the parties refuses to sign the 
certificate, a note about this shall be put down in it, with the certificate being signed by the other party. 
A unilateral certificate of acceptance of the result of the works may be recognized by a court of law 
as invalid only in case of the motives of the refusal to sign the acceptance certificate have been 
recognized by it as sound. 
5. In cases where this is provided for by the law or the building contract or follows from the nature 
of the works performed under the contract, the acceptance of the result of the works shall be preceded by 
preliminary tests. In these cases the acceptance may take place only with the positive result of the 
preliminary tests. 
6. The customer shall have the right to refuse to accept the result of the works in case of the 
discovery of shortcomings, which exclude the possibility of its use for the purpose, indicated in the 
building contract and may not be removed by the contractor or the customer. 
Article 754. The Contractor's Liability for the Quality of Works 
1. The contractor shall bear liability to the customer for the departures from the requirements, 
provided for by technical documents and by the building norms and rules obligatory for the parties, and 
also for the failure to achieve this building project's indicators, indicated in the technical documents, 
including the enterprise's industrial capacity. 
In the event of the reconstruction (renewal, reorganization, restoration, etc.) of a building or 
structure the contractor shall bear liability for the reduction or loss of the durability, stability and 
reliability of the building, structure or a part thereof. 
2. The contractor shall bear no liability for small departures from technical documents, made 
without the customer's consent, if he proves that they have not influences the quality of project 
construction. 
Article 755. Guarantees of Quality in the Building Contract 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the building contract, the contractor shall guarantee the 
achievement by the construction project of the indicators indicated in technical documents and the 
possibility of using the project in keeping with the building contract throughout the guarantee period. The 
statutory guarantee period may be extended by the agreement of the parties. 
2. The contractor shall bear liability for defects, discovered during the guarantee period, unless he 
proves that they occurred due to the normal wear and tear of the project or of the parts thereof, its 
incorrect instructions, elaborated by the customer himself or by the third persons attracted by him, the 
improper repair of the project, carried out by the customer himself or by the third persons attracted by 
him. 
3. The running of the guarantee period lapses for all the time during which the project could not be 
exploited due to the defects for which the contractor is liable. 
4. In case of discovery of defects, indicated in Item 1 of Article 754 of this Code, during the 
guarantee period, the customer shall inform the contractor about them within reasonable time upon their 
discovery. 
Article 756. The Time-limits of Discovery of the Improper Quality of Building 
Works 
In the event of making claims for the improper quality of the result of the works, the rules, specified 
by Items 1-5 of Article 724 of this Code shall be applied. 
The deadline for the discovery of defects shall be five years in conformity with Items 2 and 4 of 
Article 724 of this Code. 
Article 757. Elimination of Defects at the Expense of the Customer 
1. The building contract may provide for the obligation of the contractor to eliminate on the demand 
of the customer and at his expense the defects for which the contractor is not liable. 
2. The contractor shall have the right to refuse to perform the obligation, indicated in Item 1 of this 
Article, in cases where the removal of defects is not connected directly with the subject of the contract or 
cannot be realized by the contractor for the reasons beyond his control. 
_ 4. Contract for Design and Survey Works 
Article 758. Contract for Design and Survey Works 
Under the contract for design and survey works the contractor (designer or surveyor) shall undertake 
to elaborate technical documentation of the customer and/or perform survey works, whereas the customer 
shall undertake to accept and pay for their result. 
Article 759. Initial Data for the Performance of Design and Survey Works 
1. Under the contract for design and survey works the customer shall be obliged to give to the 
contractor his assignment for designing, and also other initial data needed for drawing up technical 
documentation. An assignment for the performance of design works may be prepared by the contractor on 
behalf of the customer. In this case the assignment shall become mandatory for the parties since the time 
of its approval by the customer. 
2. The contractor shall be obliged to observe the requirements containing in the assignment and in 
other initial data for the performance of design and survey works, and shall have the right to depart from 
them only with the customer's consent. 
Article 760. The Contractor's Obligations 
1. Under the contract for design and survey works the contractor shall be obliged: 
to perform the works in keeping with the assignment and other initial data on designing and with the 
contract; 
to coordinate the ready technical documents with the customer and, whenever necessary, together 
with the customer - with competent state bodies and local self-government bodies; 
to transfer to the customer ready technical documents and the results of the survey works. 
The contractor shall have no right to give technical documents to third persons without the 
customer's consent. 
2. Under the contract for design and survey works the contractor shall guarantee to the customer that 
third persons do not have the right to prevent the performance of the works or restrict their performance 
on the basis of the technical documentation prepared by the contractor. 
Article 761. The Contractor's Liability for the Improper Performance of Design 
and Survey Works 
1. Under the contract for design and survey works the contractor shall bear liability for the improper 
drawing up of technical documents and for the performance of survey works, including defects 
discovered later on during construction, and also in the process of the exploitation of the project, set up on 
the basis of the technical documents and the data of the survey works. 
2. In the event of discovery of defects in technical documents or in survey works the contractor shall 
be obliged to remake technical documentation gratis on the customer's demand and accordingly carry out 
the necessary additional survey works, and also to reimburse to the customer the losses caused, if the law 
or the contract for performance of design and survey works establishes otherwise. 
Article 762. The Customer's Obligations 
Under the contract for design and survey works the customer shall be obliged to take the following 
measures, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract: 
to pay to the contractor the fixed price in full after the completion of all works or to pay it in 
instalments after the completion of individual stages of the work; 
to use technical documentation received from the contractor only for the purposes, provided for by 
the contract, not to turn over technical documents to third persons and not to divulge the data contained 
therein without the contractor's consent; 
to render assistance to the contractor in the performance of design and survey works in the scope 
and on the terms and conditions stipulated by the contract; 
to participate together with the contractor in the coordination of ready technical documentation with 
relevant state bodies and local self-government bodies; 
to reimburse the contractor's additional expenses, incurred by changes in the initial data for the 
performance of design and survey works due to the circumstances beyond the contractor's control; 
to draw the contractor in the participation in the case on a claim filed by a third person to the 
contractor in connection with the defects of the compiled technical documents or the performed survey 
works. 
_ 5. Contract Works for State Needs 
Article 763. The State Contract for the Performance of Contract Works to Meet 
State Needs 
1. Contract building works (Article 740), design and survey works (Article 758), intended for 
meeting the needs of the Russian Federation or a subject of the Russian Federation and financed at the 
expense of the corresponding budgets and extra-budgetary sources, shall be performed on the basis of the 
state contract for the fulfilment of contract works to meet state needs. 
2. Under the state contract for contract works to meet state needs (hereinafter referred to as the state 
contract) the contractor shall undertake to perform building, design and other works related to the 
construction and repair of the projects of a production and non-production character and to transfer them 
to the state customer, whereas the state customer shall undertake to accept the fulfilled works, to pay for 
them or to ensure their payment. 
Article 764. The Parties to the State Contract 
Under the state contract the role of the state customer shall be payed by the state body which 
possesses the required investment resources or by the organization vested by the relevant state body with 
the right to dispose of such resources, while the role of the contractor shall be played by a legal entity or 
individual. 
Article 765. The Grounds and Procedure for the Conclusion of a State Contract 
The grounds and procedure for the conclusion of a state contract shall be determined in keeping 
with the provisions of Articles 527 and 528 of this Code. 
Article 766. The Contents of the State Contract 
1. The state contract shall contain the terms of the scope and value of the work subject to 
performance, the time-limits of its beginning and end, the amount and procedure of financing and paying 
the works and the methods of security of the parties' obligations. 
2. In case where a state contract is concluded according to the results of a tender for placing the 
order for contract works to meet state needs, the terms and conditions of the state contract shall be 
determined in accordance with the announced tender terms and the offer tendered by the contractor who 
is recognized as the bidding winner. 
Article 767. Changes in the State Contract 
1. In case of the diminution of the resources of the corresponding budget in the statutory manner, 
allocated for the financing of contract works, the parties shall be obliged to agree upon new dates, and, 
whenever necessary, other conditions of the performance of the works. The contractor shall have the right 
to demand that the state customer compensate the losses caused by changes in the dates of the fulfilment 
of the works. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law, changes in the state contract, not associated with the 
circumstances, indicated in Item 1 of this Article, shall be made by the agreement of the parties. 
Article 768. Legal Regulation of the State Contract 
The law on contracts for state needs shall be applicable to the relations involved in state contracts 
for the fulfilment of contract works for state needs in the part which is not regulated by this Code. 
Chapter 38. Performance of Research and Development and 
Technological Works 
Article 769. Contracts for the Performance of Research and Development and 
Technological Works 
1. Under the contract for the performance of research and development and technological works the 
executor shall be obliged to carry out scientific research, specified by the customer's technical 
assignment, while under the contract for the development and technological works he shall be obliged to 
develop the sample of a new product, elaborate design documentation or new technology for it, whereas 
the customer shall undertake to accept the work and pay for it. 
2. The contract with the executor may cover both the entire cycle of research, development and 
manufacture of the sample of the new product and its particular stages (elements). 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the contract, the risk of accidental impossibility of 
executing contracts for the performance of research and development and technological works shall be 
borne by the customer. 
4. The terms and conditions of the contracts for performance of research and development and 
technological works shall correspond to the laws and other legal acts on exclusive rights (intellectual 
property). 
Article 770. The Performance of Works 
1. The executor shall be obliged to carry out scientific research in person. He shall have the right to 
draw third persons in the fulfilment of a contract for scientific research works only with the customer's 
consent. 
2. During the performance of development or technological works the executor shall have the right, 
unless otherwise stipulated by the contract, to draw third persons in its execution. The rules for the 
general contractor and subcontractor (Article 706) shall be applicable to the relations between the 
executor and the third persons. 
Article 771. The Confidentiality of Information Which Constitutes the Subject 
of the Contract 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contracts for the performance of research and development and 
technological works, the parties thereto shall be obliged to ensure the confidentiality of information 
relating to the subject of the contract, the progress of its execution and the obtained results. The scope of 
information recognized as confidential shall be determined by the contract. 
2. Each party shall undertake to publish information to be recognized as confidential and obtained 
during the performance of the work only with the consent of the other party. 
Article 772. The Rights of the Parties to the Results of the Works 
1. The parties to the contracts for the performance of research and development and technological 
works shall have the right to make use of the works, including those amenable to legal protection, within 
the framework of the contract and on its terms and conditions. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract, the customer shall have the right to make use of the 
results of the work given to him by the executor, including those amenable to legal protection, while the 
executor shall have the right to use the obtained results of the works for his own needs. 
Article 773. The Executor's Obligations 
The executor shall be obliged to take the following measures under the contracts for the 
performance of research and development and technological works: 
to perform the works in keeping with the technical assignment agreed upon with the customer and to 
turn over to the customer their results within the period fixed by the contract; 
to coordinate with the customer the necessity for the use of the results of intellectual activity that 
belong to third persons and the acquisition of rights to their use; 
to remove the defects, made through his fault, in the fulfilled works with his own forces and at his 
own expense, if they can involve departures from the technical and economic parameters, envisaged by 
the technical assignment or the contract; 
to inform forthwith the customer about the ascertained impossibility to receive the expected results 
or about the inexpediency of continuing the work; 
to guarantee to the customer the transfer of the results which have been received under the contract 
and which do not break the exclusive rights of other persons. 
Article 774. The Customer's Obligations 
1. In contracts for the performance of research and development and technological work the 
customer shall be obliged to undertake the following measures: 
to give to the executor information needed for the fulfilment of the work; 
to accept the results of the fulfilled works and to pay for them. 
2. The contract may also provide for the obligation of the customer to give to the executor a 
technical assignment and to agree with him the programme) technical and economic parameters) or the 
topics of the works. 
Article 775. The Consequences of the Impossible Attainment of Results of 
Scientific Research Works 
If in the course of scientific research works it is found out that it is impossible to attain results owing 
to the circumstances that are beyond to executor's control, the customer shall be obliged to pay for the 
value of the works carried out before the ascertainment of the impossibility to obtain results, envisaged by 
the contract for the performance of scientific research works, but not over and above the corresponding 
part of the price of the work, indicated in the contract. 
Article 776. The Consequences of the Impossible Continuation of Research and 
Development and Technological Works 
If during the performance of research and development and technological works it is found out that 
the impossible or inexpedient continuation of the works has arisen not through the fault of the executor, 
the customer shall be obliged to pay for the expenses incurred by the executor. 
Article 777. The Liability of the Executor for the Breach of a Contract 
1. The executor shall be liable to the customer for breaking the contracts for the performance of 
research and development and technological works, unless he proves that such breach has taken not 
through the fault of the executor (Item 1 of Article 401). 
2. The executor shall be obliged to reimburse the losses caused by him to the customer within the 
limits of the cost of the works in which defects have been discovered, if the contract provides that they 
are subject to compensation within the limits of the total cost of the works under the contract. The lost 
profit shall be subject to compensation in cases stipulated by the contract. 
Article 778. Legal Regulation of the Contracts for the Performance of Research 
and Development and Technological Works 
The rules of Articles 708, 709 and 738 of this Code shall be applicable accordingly to the dates of 
the fulfilment of works and to their price, and also to the consequences of the customer's non-appearance 
for the receipt of the results of the works. 
The rules of Articles 763-768 of this Code shall be applicable to the state contracts for the 
performance of research and development and technological works to meet state needs. 
Chapter 39. The Repayable Rendering of Services 
On some issues of judicial practice arising in the consideration of disputes associated with contracts 
for provision of law services see Information Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of 
the Russian Federation No. 48 of September 29, 1999  
Article 779. The Contract for the Repayable Rendering of Services 
1. Under the contract of repayable rendering of services the executor shall undertake to render 
services (to perform certain actions or carry out certain activity) according to the customer's assignment, 
while the customer shall undertake to pay for these services. 
2. The rules of this Chapter shall be applicable to the contracts of rendering the communication 
services, medical, veterinary, audit, consulting, information, instruction, tourist and other services, except 
for the services rendered under the contracts, envisaged by Chapters 37, 38, 40, 41, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 51 
and 53 of this Code. 
Article 780. The Execution of the Contract for the Repayable Rendering of 
Services 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract for the repayable rendering of services, the executor 
shall be obliged to render the services in person. 
Article 781. Payment for Services 
1. The customer shall be obliged to pay of the services rendered to him within the period and in the 
procedure indicated in the contract for the repayable rendering of services. 
2. If it is impossible to execute the contract through the fault of the customer, the services rendered 
shall be subject to full payment, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the contract for the repayable 
rendering of services. 
3. In case where it is impossible to execute the contract due to the circumstances for which neither 
party is answerable, the customer shall reimburse the executor's actual expenses, unless otherwise 
provided for by the law or the contract for repayable rendering services. 
Article 782. The Unilateral Refusal to Execute the Contract for the Repayable 
Rendering of Services 
1. The contractor shall have the right to refuse to execute the contract for the repayable rendering of 
services, provided the executor's actually incurred expenses are paid out. 
2. The executor shall have the right to refuse to execute the obligations under the contract for the 
repayable rendering of services, provided the customer's losses are fully reimbursed. 
Article 783. The Legal Regulations of the Contract for the Repayable Rendering 
of Services 
The general provisions on the work and labour contract (Articles 702-729) and the provisions on the 
domestic contract (Articles 730-739) shall be applicable to the contract for the repayable rendering 
services, unless this runs counter to Articles 779-782 of this Code, and also to the specific subject of the 
contract for the repayable rendering of services. 
Chapter 40. Carriage 
Article 784. General Provisions on Carriage 
1. Cargoes, passengers and baggage shall be transported on the basis of the contract of carriage. 
2. The general conditions of carriage shall be determined by transport charters and codes, other laws 
and rules issued in accordance with these laws. 
On the carriage of cargoes, passengers and baggage see: 
the Air Code of the Russian Federation No. 60-FZ of March 19, 1997 
Statute on Railways of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of the USSR 
No. 270 of April 6, 1964 
Statute on the Motor Transport of the RSFSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of 
the RSFSR No. 12 of January 8, 1969 
Statute on Domestic Water Transport of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR No. 1801 of October 15, 1955 
Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999  
The conditions of the carriage of cargoes, passengers and baggage by particular transport vehicles, 
and also the liability of the parties for this transportation shall be determined by the agreement of the 
parties, unless otherwise stipulated by this Code, transport charters and codes, other laws and rules issued 
in conformity with them. 
Article 785. The Contract of Carriage of Cargo 
1. Under the contract of carriage of cargo the carrier shall undertake to deliver the cargo entrusted to 
him by the consignor to the point of destination and to release it to the person (consignee) authorized to 
receive it, while the consignor shall undertake to pay a fixed charge for the carriage of cargo. 
2. The conclusion of a contract for the carriage of cargo shall be confirmed by the drawing up and 
issue of a consignment bill to the consignor of cargo (bill of lading or any other cargo document, 
stipulated by the relevant transport charter or code). 
On drawing up of a consignment bill in case of the carriage by railways and motor transport see: 
the Air Code of the Russian Federation No. 60-FZ of March 19, 1997 
Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999  
Statute on the Motor Transport of the RSFSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of 
the RSFSR No. 12 of January 8, 1969 
Statute on Railways of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of the USSR 
No. 270 of April 6, 1964 
Statute on Domestic Water Transport of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR No. 1801 of October 15, 1955 
Article 786. The Contract of Carriage of the Passenger 
1. Under the contract of carriage of the passenger the carrier shall undertake to transport the 
passenger to the point of destination, and in case of delivery of luggage to the point of destination and to 
issue it to the person authorized to receive it; the passenger shall undertake to pay the fixed charge for the 
journey and for the carriage of luggage in case of its registry. 
2. The conclusion of a contract of the passenger carriage shall be certified with a ticket, while the 
booking of luggage by the passenger - with a luggage receipt. 
The forms of the ticket and the luggage receipt shall be established in the order, prescribed by 
transport charters and codes. 
3. The passenger shall have the right in the order, prescribed by the relevant transport charter or 
code: 
to carry with himself his children free of charge or on other easy terms; 
to carry with himself hand luggage free of charge within the limits of fixed norms; 
to book luggage for carriage for a tariff charge. 
On the carriage of passengers see: 
the Air Code of the Russian Federation No. 60-FZ of March 19, 1997 
Statute on the Motor Transport of the RSFSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of 
the RSFSR No. 12 of January 8, 1969 
Statute on Railways of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of the USSR 
No. 270 of April 6, 1964 
Statute on Domestic Water Transport of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR No. 1801 of October 15, 1955 
Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999  
Article 787. The Freight Contract 
Under the freight contract (charter) one party shall undertake to provide to the other party 
(affreighter) for charge the entire or partial capacity of one or several transport facilities for one or several 
voyages or flights for the haulage of cargoes, passengers and baggage. 
Procedure for the conclusion of a freight contract, and also the form of the said contract shall be 
established by transport charters and codes. 
About chartering see: the Air Code of the Russian Federation No. 60-FZ of March 19, 1997, Merchant 
Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999 
Article 788. Through Mixed Traffic 
The mutual relations of transport organizations that carry cargoes, passengers and baggage with the 
aid of various transport vehicles under a single transport document (through mixed traffic), and also the 
procedure of the organization of this carriage shall be determined by the agreements between the 
organizations of the respective types of transport, concluded in keeping with the law on direct mixed 
(combined) carriage. 
On direct mixed carriage see: 
Statute on Railways of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of the USSR 
No. 270 of April 6, 1964 
Statute on the Motor Transport of the RSFSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of 
the RSFSR No. 12 of January 8, 1969 
Statute on Domestic Water Transport of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR No. 1801 of October 15, 1955 
Article 789. Carriage by Public Transport 
Federal Law No. 15-FZ of January 10, 2003 amended Item 1 of Article 789 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
1. The carriage realized by a profit-making organization shall be recognized as the carriage by 
public transport, if it transpires from the law, other legal acts, that the said organization is duty-bound to 
effect the carriage of cargoes, passengers and baggage in case of an application by any individual or legal 
entity. 
The list of organizations which are obligated to effect the carriage to be recognized as the carriage 
by public transport shall be published in the established order. 
2. The contract of carriage by public transport shall be a public agreement (Article 426). 
Article 790. Payment for Carriage 
1. Payment for carriage, fixed by the agreement of the parties, shall be collected for the 
transportation of cargoes, passengers and baggage, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or other legal 
acts. 
2. Payment for the carriage of cargoes, passengers and baggage by public transport shall be 
estimated on the basis of the rates, approved in the order, established by transport charters and codes. 
On tariffs for the carriage of cargoes, passengers and baggage by public transport see: 
the Air Code of the Russian Federation No. 60-FZ of March 19, 1997 
Statute on the Motor Transport of the RSFSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of 
the RSFSR No. 12 of January 8, 1969 
Statute on Railways of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of the USSR 
No. 270 of April 6, 1964 
Statute on Domestic Water Transport of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR No. 1801 of October 15, 1955 
Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999  
3. Works and services, performed or rendered by the carrier at the request of the cargo owner and 
not specified by rates, shall be paid by the agreement of the parties. 
4. The carrier shall have the right to withhold the cargo and baggage, given to him for carriage, as 
security for the payments for carriage due to him (Articles 359 and 360), unless otherwise stipulated by 
the law, other legal acts, the contract of carriage or unless the contrary follows from the substance of the 
obligation. 
5. In cases where the laws or other legal acts have introduced preferences for the payment for the 
carriage of cargoes, passengers and baggage, the expenses incurred in this connection shall be reimbursed 
by the transport organization from the resources of the appropriate budget. 
Article 791. The Supply of Transport Vehicles, the Loading and Unloading of 
Cargo 
1. The carrier shall be obliged to drive up serviceable transport vehicles in a condition fit for the 
carriage of cargo to the consignor for loading cargo in time, fixed by the order accepted from him, the 
contract of carriage or the agreement on the organization of carriage. 
The consignor of cargo shall have the right to waiver the supplied transport vehicles which are not 
fit for the carriage of cargo. 
2. The loading (unloading) of cargo shall be carried out by the transport organization or the 
consignor (consignee) in the procedure, specified by the contract, with the observance of the provisions of 
transport charters and codes and the rules promulgated in compliance with them. 
On the supply of transport vehicles, the loading and unloading of cargos see: 
the Air Code of the Russian Federation No. 60-FZ of March 19, 1997 
Statute on the Motor Transport of the RSFSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of 
the RSFSR No. 12 of January 8, 1969 
Statute on Railways of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of the USSR 
No. 270 of April 6, 1964 
Statute on Domestic Water Transport of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR No. 1801 of October 15, 1955 
Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999  
3. The loading (unloading) of cargo, realized by the forces and means of the consignor (consignee), 
shall be effected in the periods of time, stipulated by the contract, unless such periods have been fixed by 
transport charters and codes and the rules adopted in conformity with them. 
Article 792. Time-limits for the Delivery of Cargo, Passengers and Baggage 
The carrier shall be obliged to deliver cargo, passengers or baggage to the point of destination in the 
time-limits, fixed in the procedure, stipulated by transport charters and codes, and in the absence of such 
time-limits - within the reasonable period. 
On time-limits for the delivery of baggage see: 
the Air Code of the Russian Federation No. 60-FZ of March 19, 1997 
Statute on the Motor Transport of the RSFSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of 
the RSFSR No. 12 of January 8, 1969 
Statute on Railways of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of the USSR 
No. 270 of April 6, 1964 
Statute on Domestic Water Transport of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR No. 1801 of October 15, 1955 
Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999  
Article 793. Liability for Breaking the Obligations of Carriage 
1. In case of default on the obligations of carriage or of improper discharge of such obligations, the 
parties shall bear liability, established by this Code, transport charters and codes, and also by the 
agreement of the parties. 
On the liability for breaking the obligations of carriage see: 
the Air Code of the Russian Federation No. 60-FZ of March 19, 1997 
Statute on the Motor Transport of the RSFSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of 
the RSFSR No. 12 of January 8, 1969 
Statute on Railways of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of the USSR 
No. 270 of April 6, 1964 
Statute on Domestic Water Transport of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR No. 1801 of October 15, 1955 
Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999  
2. Agreements between transport organizations and passengers or cargo owners on the limitation or 
elimination of the carrier's statutory liability shall be void, except for the cases when the possibility of 
such agreements is provided for by transport charters or codes for the carriage of cargo. 
Article 794. The Carrier's Liability for Failure to Drive up Transport Vehicles 
and the Consignor's Liability for Non-use of Driven-up Transport Vehicles 
1. For failure to drive up transport vehicles for the carriage of cargo in keeping with the accepted 
order or any other contract the carrier shall bear the liability, established by transport charters and codes 
and also by the agreement of the parties, and for failure to submit cargo or for non-use of driven-up 
transport vehicles for other reasons the consignor shall bear the liability, established by transport charters 
and codes, and also by the agreement of the parties. 
On the liability for failure to drive up transport vehicles for the carriage of cargo see: 
the Air Code of the Russian Federation No. 60-FZ of March 19, 1997 
Statute on Railways of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of the USSR 
No. 270 of April 6, 1964 
Statute on the Motor Transport of the RSFSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of 
the RSFSR No. 12 of January 8, 1969 
Statute on Domestic Water Transport of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR No. 1801 of October 15, 1955 
Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999  
2. The carrier and the consignor shall be released from liability in case of failure to drive up 
transport vehicles or of non-use of driven-up transport vehicles, if this was due to the following reasons: 
force majeure, and also other elements (fires, snow-drifts, floods) and hostilities; 
the termination or limitation of the carriage of cargo in certain directions, which has been practiced 
in the order, prescribed by the respective transport charter or code; 
in other cases, provided for by transport charters and codes. 
Article 795. The Liability of the Carrier for the Delayed Dispatch of the 
Passenger 
1. For the delayed dispatch of the transport vehicle which carries the passenger or for the late arrival 
of such transport vehicle at the point of destination (except for carriage in urban or suburban 
communication) the carrier shall pay a fine to the passenger in the amount, fixed by the corresponding 
transport charter or code, unless he proves that the delay or lateness have taken place due to force 
majeure, the removal of the malfunction of transport vehicles threatening the lives and health of 
passengers or due to other circumstances beyond the carrier's control. 
On the liability for the delayed dispatch of the transport vehicle which carries the passenger see: 
the Air Code of the Russian Federation No. 60-FZ of March 19, 1997 
Statute on the Motor Transport of the RSFSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of 
the RSFSR No. 12 of January 8, 1969 
Statute on Domestic Water Transport of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR No. 1801 of October 15, 1955 
Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999  
2. If the passenger refuses to be carried because of the delayed dispatch of a transport vehicle, the 
carrier shall be obliged to return the fare to the passenger. 
Article 796. The Liability of the Carrier for the Loss and Short Delivery of, and 
Damage to, Cargo or Baggage 
1. The carrier shall be liable for the non-safety of cargo or baggage after it was accepted for carriage 
and before it was issued to the consignee, the person authorized by him or the person authorized to 
receive baggage, unless he proves that the loss and short delivery of, or damage to, cargo or baggage have 
taken place due to the circumstances which the carrier could not prevent and whose removal has not 
depended on him. 
2. The damage caused during the carriage of cargo or baggage shall be recovered by the carrier in 
the following cases: 
in case of the loss or short delivery of cargo of baggage - in the amount of the value of the lost or 
missing cargo or baggage; 
in case of the damage to cargo or baggage - in the amount of the sum by which its value fell, and if 
it is impossible to restore the damaged cargo or baggage - in the amount of its value; 
in case of the loss of cargo or baggage delivered for carriage with the announcement of its value - in 
the amount of the announced value of cargo or baggage. 
The value of cargo or baggage shall be determined on the basis of its price, indicated in the seller's 
bill or envisaged by the contract, and in the absence of a bill or with reference to the price in the contract 
in terms of the price which under comparable circumstances is usually charged for similar goods. 
3. In addition to the restitution of the ascertained damage, caused by the loss and short delivery or, 
or damage to, cargo or baggage, the carrier shall return to the consignor (consignee) the payment for 
carriage, recovered for the carriage of the lost, missing, spoiled or damaged cargo or baggage, if this 
payment is not a part of the value of cargo. 
4. Documents on the causes of the non-safety of cargo or baggage (commercial report, general form 
statement, etc.), compiled by the carrier unilaterally, shall be subject to the appraisal by the court in case 
of a dispute in addition to other documents certifying the circumstances, which can serve as a ground for 
the liability of the carrier, consignor or consignee of cargo or baggage. 
On the air carrier's responsibility for the loss, the shortage or the damage (spoilage) of the the freight 
see: 
Air Code of the Russian Federation No. 60-FZ of March 19, 1997  
Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999  
Article 797. Claims and Suits in the Carriage of Cargoes 
1. Before bringing a suit against the carrier that follows from the carriage of cargo it is obligatory to 
make a claim on him in the procedure stipulated by the respective transport charter or code. 
On the procedure for bringing a suit that follows from the carriage of cargo see: 
the Air Code of the Russian Federation No. 60-FZ of March 19, 1997 
Statute on Railways of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of the USSR 
No. 270 of April 6, 1964 
Statute on the Motor Transport of the RSFSR approved by the Decision of the Council of Ministers of 
the RSFSR No. 12 of January 8, 1969 
Statute on Domestic Water Transport of the USSR approved by the Decision of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR No. 1801 of October 15, 1955 
Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 30, 1999  
Juridical Overview of resolution by arbitration courts of the disputes associated with the protection of 
foreign investors, (Information Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian 
Federation No. 58 of January 18, 2001)  
2. A suit against the carrier may be brought by the consignor or consignee in case of a full or partial 
refusal of the carrier to satisfy the claim or in case of non-receipt of a reply from the carrier within 30 
days. 
3. The period of limitation on the claims following from the carriage of cargo shall fixed in one year 
since the time, determined in keeping with transport charters and codes. 
Article 798. Contracts for the Organization of the Carriage of Cargo 
In case of need for systematic carriage the carrier and the cargo owner may conclude long-term 
contracts for the organization of carriage. 
Under the contract of the organization of the carriage of cargo the carrier shall undertake to accept 
in fixed time-limits, while the cargo owner shall undertake to present cargo for carriage in the stipulated 
scope. The contract for the organization of the carriage of cargo shall determine the amounts, time-limits 
and other conditions for the provision of transport facilities and for the presentation of cargo for carriage, 
the procedure of payments, and also other conditions for the organization of carriage. 
Article 799. Contracts Concluded Between Transport Organizations 
Contracts for the organization of the work of ensuring the carriage of cargo (complex agreements, 
contracts for centralized delivery of cargo and others) may be concluded between the organizations of 
different kinds of transport. 
Procedure for the conclusion of such contracts shall be determined by transport charters and codes, 
other laws and other legal acts. 
Article 800. The Carrier's Liability for the Infliction of Harm to the Life and 
Health of a Passenger 
The liability of the carrier for the harm inflicted to the life and health of a passenger shall be 
determined according to the rules of Chapter 59 of this Code, unless the law or the contract of carriage 
provides for the carrier's increased liability. 
Chapter 41. Transport Forwarding 
See Federal Law No. 87-FZ of June 30, 2003 on the Freight-Forwarding Activity  
Article 801. Contract of Transport Forwarding 
1. Under the contract of transport forwarding one party (forwarding agent shall undertake to perform 
or organize the performance of the services of cargo carriage for reward and at the expense of the other 
party (consignor or consignee as a client). 
The contract of transport forwarding may provide for the forwarder's obligation to organize the 
carriage of cargo by transport and along the route, chosen by the forwarding agent or the client, the 
obligation of the forwarding agent to conclude a contract (contracts) of the carriage of cargo on behalf of 
the client or on his own behalf, to ensure the dispatch and receipt of cargo, and also other obligations for 
carriage. 
The contract of transport forwarding may provide as additional services such operations necessary 
for the delivery of cargo as the receipt of documents required for export or import, the performance of 
customs and other formalities, the inspection of the quantity and condition of cargo, its loading and 
unloading, the payment of duties, fees and other expenses to be incurred by the client, the storage of 
cargo, its receipt in the point of destination, and also the fulfilment of other operations and the provision 
of services, specified by the contract. 
2. The rules of this Chapter shall also extend to the cases where in keeping with the contract the 
obligations of the forwarding agent shall be discharged by the carrier. 
3. The conditions for the fulfilment of the contract of transport forwarding shall be determined by 
the agreement of the parties, unless otherwise stipulated by the law on transport forwarding, by other laws 
and other legal acts. 
Article 802. The Form of the Contract of Transport Forwarding 
1. The contract of transport forwarding shall be concluded in writing. 
2. The client shall issue to the forwarding agent a power of attorney, if it is necessary for the 
discharge of his obligations. 
Article 803. The Liability of the Forwarding Agent under the Contract of 
Transport Forwarding 
For default on the obligations or improper discharge of obligations the forwarding agent shall bear 
liability on the grounds and in the amount which are determined in accordance with the rules of Chapter 
25 of this Code. 
If the forwarding agent proves that the infringement of the obligation is caused by the improper 
execution of the contracts of carriage, the liability of this forwarding agent to the client shall be 
determined by the same rules under which the relevant carrier is liable to the forwarding agent. 
Article 804. Documents and Other Information Submitted to the Forwarding 
Agent 
1. The client shall be obliged to submit to the forwarding agent documents and other information 
about the properties of cargo, the terms of its carriage, and also other information needed for the 
discharge of the forwarder's obligation, specified by the contract of transport forwarding. 
2. The forwarding agent shall be obliged to inform the client about the discovered shortcomings of 
received information, and in case of incomplete information to request from the client additional data. 
3. In case of the non-submission of the necessary information by the client the forwarding agent 
shall have the right not to proceed to the discharge of relevant obligations until the time of presenting 
such information. 
4. The client shall bear liability for the losses caused to the forwarding agent in connection with the 
breach of the obligation of presenting information, indicated in Item 1 of this Article. 
Article 805. The Discharge of the Forwarding Agent's Obligations by a Third 
Person 
If it does not follow from the contract of transport forwarding that the forwarder should discharge 
his duties in person, the forwarder shall have the right to draw other persons in the discharge of his 
obligations. 
The entrustment of a third person with the discharge of the obligation shall not release the forwarder 
from the liability to the client for the execution of the contract. 
Article 806. Unilateral Refusal to Execute the Contract of Transport Forwarding 
Any party shall have the right to refuse to execute the contract of transport forwarding by warning 
the other party within a reasonable period. 
In case of unilateral refusal to execute the contract the party which stated his refusal shall reimburse 
to the other party the losses caused by the dissolution of the contract. 
Chapter 42. Loans and Credits 
_ 1. Loans 
Article 807. The Loan Agreement 
1. Under the loan agreement one party (the lender) shall transfer into the ownership of the other 
party (borrower) money or things marked by generic features, while the borrower shall undertake to 
return to the lender the same sum of money (the loan amount) or the equal quantity of things of the same 
type and quality. 
A loan agreement shall be deemed concluded from the moment the money or things are transferred. 
2. Foreign currency and currency values may be a subject of a loan agreement on the territory of the 
Russian Federation with the observance of the rules of Articles 140, 141 and 317 of this Code. 
Article 808. The Form of the Loan Agreement 
1. A loan agreement between individuals shall be concluded in writing, if its sum of money exceeds 
in more than ten times the statutory minimum amount of wages or salaries and regardless of the sum of 
money in case where the lender is a legal entity. 
2. In acknowledgment of a loan agreement and its terms and conditions the borrower's receipt or 
another document certifying the transfer of a definite sum of money or a certain quantity of things may be 
presented. 
Article 809. Interest Under the Loan Agreement 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the loan agreement, the lender shall have the right to 
receive from the borrower interest for the sum of the loan in the amount and in the procedure, specified 
by the agreement. In the absence in the agreement of a clause on the amount of interest, the latter shall be 
determined by the rate of bank interest (the rate of refunding) in the place of residence of the lender or in 
the place of the location of the legal entity, if the latter is the lender, on the day of payment by the 
borrower of the sum of debt or its appropriate part. 
2. In the absence of a different agreement interest shall be paid out every month up to the day of the 
return of the sum of the loan. 
3. The loan agreement is supposed to be interest free, unless otherwise stipulated expressly in cases 
where: 
the agreement is concluded between individuals for the sum of money that does not exceed the five
fold amount of the statutory minimum wage or salary and is not connected with the business activity of at 
least of one of the parties; 
under the agreement other things, marked by generic features, and not money are transferred to the 
borrower. 
Article 810. The Borrower's Obligation to Return the Loan Agreement 
1. The borrower shall be obliged to return to the lender the received loan amount in the period and 
in the order, prescribed by the loan agreement. 
In cases where the term of the return of loan amount is not fixed by or determined by the time of 
demand, the loan amount shall be returned by the borrower during 30 days since the day of the making by 
the lender of the claim, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the loan agreement, the amount of an interest-free loan may be 
returned by the borrower short of the term. 
The loan amount given on interest may be returned short of the term with the consent of the lender. 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the loan agreement, the loan amount shall be deemed to be 
returned at the time of its transfer to the lender or of the charge of corresponding pecuniary means to his 
bank account. 
Article 811. The Consequences of Breaking the Loan Agreement by the 
Borrower 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the loan agreement, in cases where the borrower fails to 
return on time the loan amount, interest on this sum of money shall be subject to payment in amount, 
envisaged by Item 1 of Article 395 of this Code, from the day when it should have been returned to the 
day of its return to the lender, regardless of the payment of interest, specified by Item 1 of Article 809 of 
this Code. 
2. If the loan agreement provides for the return of the loan in parts (by instalment), then with the 
breach by the borrower of the period, fixed for the return of the regular part of the loan, the lender shall 
have the right to demand the anticipatory return of the entire remaining sum of the loan together with 
interest due to him. 
Article 812. The Contesting of a Loan Agreement 
1. The borrower shall have the right to contest the loan agreement due to the lack of money by 
proving that money or other things have not been received by him in reality from the lender or received in 
lesser quantity that it was stated in the agreement. 
2. If a loan agreement is to be concluded in writing (Article 808), it shall be impermissible to contest 
it due to the lack of money by means of witness depositions, except in cases where the agreement was 
concluded under the influence of fraud, violence, threat or the malicious agreement of the borrower's 
representative with the lender or the concurrence of hard circumstances. 
3. If it is found during the process of contesting by the borrower of the loan agreement due to the 
lack of money that money or other things have not been received in reality from the lender, the loan 
agreement shall be deemed to be non-concluded. When money or things have been in fact received by the 
borrower from the lender in lesser quantity than it is indicated in the agreement, the latter shall be deemed 
to be concluded for this quantity of money or things. 
Article 813. The Consequences of the Loss of the Security of the Borrower's 
Obligations 
In case of default by the borrower on the obligations, stipulated by the loan agreement, to secure the 
return of the loan amount, and also in case of the loss of the security or of the deterioration of its 
conditions due to the circumstances for which the lender is not answerable, the lender shall have the right 
to demand from the borrower the anticipatory return of the loan amount and the payment of interest due 
to him, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement. 
Article 814. Special-purpose Loan 
1. If a loan agreement is concluded with the proviso of using by the borrower the received pecuniary 
means for certain purposes (special-purpose loan), the borrower shall be obliged to ensure the possibility 
of exercising control by the lender over the special-purpose use of the loan sum. 
2. If the borrower fails to fulfil the clause of the loan agreement on the special-purpose use of the 
loan, and also if he breaks the obligations, provided for by Item 1 of this Article, the lender shall have the 
right to demand from the borrower the anticipatory return of the loan sum and the payment of interest due 
to him, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement. 
Article 815. The Bill 
In cases where in accordance with the agreement of the parties the borrower has passed the bill 
certifying the obligation of the drawer of a bill, not stipulated by anything (promissory note), or of any 
payer, indicated in the bill (bill of exchange), to pay out the pecuniary sums borrowed at maturity, 
specified by the bill, the relations of the parties under the bill shall be regulated by the law on the 
promissory note and the bill of exchange. 
Since the time of the issue of a bill the rules of this paragraph may be applied to these relations 
inasmuch as they do not contradict the law on the bill of exchange or the promissory note. 
On certain questions in the practice of considering disputes connected with the circulation of the bills 
see Decision of the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation and the Plenary 
Session of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 33/14 of December 4, 2000  
Article 816. The Bond 
In cases envisaged by the law or other legal acts the loan agreement may be concluded by means of 
the issue and sale of bonds. 
A bond shall be recognized the security that certifies the right of its holder to receive the nominal 
value of the bond or any other property equivalent from the person, who has issued the bond, in the period 
specified by it. The bond shall also give to its holder the right to receive the interest fixed in it of the 
nominal value of the obligation or any other property rights. 
The rules of this paragraph shall apply to the relations between the person who has issued the bond 
and its holder inasmuch as unless otherwise stipulated by the law or in the order established by it. 
Article 817. The State Loan Agreement 
1. Under the state loan agreement the role of the borrower shall be played by the Russian Federation 
or its subject, while that of the lender shall be played by an individual or a legal entity. 
2. State loans shall be voluntary. 
3. A state loan agreement shall be concluded through the acquisition by the lender of the issued state 
bonds or other government securities certifying the right of the lender to receive from the borrower the 
pecuniary means lent to him or, depending on the loan terms, other property, fixed interest or other 
property rights within the periods of time, specified by the terms of the floated loan. 
4. It shall be impermissible to change the terms of a floated loan. 
5. The rules for the state loan agreement shall be applied accordingly to the loans issued by a 
municipal body. 
Article 818. Novation of a Debt by Its Acknowledgment 
1. Under the agreement of the parties the debt which has arisen from purchase and sale, the lease of 
property or on any other ground may be replaced by the acknowledgment of the debt. 
2. The novation of the debt by its acknowledgment shall be carried out with the observance of the 
requirements for novation (Article 414) and shall be done in the form, specified for the conclusion of a 
loan agreement (Article 808). 
_ 2. Credit 
Article 819. The Credit Agreement 
1. Under the credit agreement the bank or any other credit organization (creditor) shall undertake to 
grant monetary means (credit) to a borrower in the amount and on the terms, stipulated by the agreement, 
while the borrower shall undertake to return the received sum of money and pay interest on it. 
2. The rules specified by the first paragraph of this Chapter shall be applied to the relations covered 
by the credit agreement, unless otherwise stipulated by the rules of paragraph one of the present Chapter 
and unless the contrary follows from the substance of the credit agreement. 
Article 820. The Form of the Credit Agreement 
A credit agreement shall be concluded in writing. 
The non-observance of the written form shall invalidate the credit agreement. Such agreement shall 
be deemed to be null and void. 
Article 821. The Refusal to Grant or Receive Credit 
1. The creditor shall have the right to refuse to grant to the borrower a credit in full or in part, as 
envisaged by the credit agreement in the presence of circumstances which expressly testify to the fact that 
the sum of money given to the borrower will not be returned in due time. 
2. The borrower shall have the right to refuse to receive credit in full or in part by notifying the 
creditor about this until the time fixed by the agreement, unless otherwise stipulated by the law, other 
legal acts or the credit agreement. 
3. If the borrower contravenes the obligation of a special-purpose use of credit (Article 814), 
provided for by the credit agreement, the creditor shall also have the right waive the further crediting of 
the borrower under the agreement. 
_ 3. Credit Against Goods and Commercial Credit 
Article 822. Credit Against Goods 
The parties may conclude a contract providing for the obligation of one party to give to the other 
party things defined by generic features (the agreement on credit against goods). The rules of the second 
paragraph of this Chapter shall be applicable to such agreement, unless otherwise stipulated by such 
agreement and unless the contrary follows from the substance of the obligation. 
The conditions on the quantity, assortment, completeness, quality, tare and/or packing of given 
things shall be implemented in accordance with the rules governing the contract of sale (Articles 465
485), unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement on credit against goods. 
Article 823. Commercial Credit 
1. Contracts whose execution is associated with the transfer to the other party of sums of money or 
other things, defined by generic features, may provide for the granting of credit, including that in the form 
of advance, prepayment, deferment or instalment payment for goods, works or services (commercial 
credit), unless otherwise stipulated by the law. 
2. The rules of this Chapter shall be applicable to commercial credit, unless otherwise stipulated by 
the rules on the agreement which has given rise to the appropriate obligation and unless this contradicts 
the substance of such obligation. 
Chapter 43. Financing Against the Assignment of a Monetary Claim 
Article 824. The Contract of Financing Against the Assignment of a Monetary 
Claim 
1. Under the contract of financing against the assignment of a monetary claim one part (financial 
agent) shall transfer or undertake to transfer to the other party (client) pecuniary means on account of the 
monetary claim of the client (creditor) to a third person (debtor) that follows from the granting by the 
client of goods, the performance of works or the rendering of services to the third person, while the client 
shall assign or undertake to assign this monetary claim to the financial agent. 
A monetary claim to the debtor may be assigned by the client to the financial agent also for the 
purpose of discharging the client's obligation to the financial agent. 
2. Under the contract of financing against the assignment of a monetary claim the obligations of the 
financial agent may include the keeping of accounting for the client, and also the provision of other 
financial service to the client, associated with the monetary claims which are the subject of the 
assignment. 
Article 825. The Financial Agent 
Contract of financing against the assignment of a monetary claim may be concluded by banks and 
other credit organizations, and also by other profit-making organizations which have a permit (license) for 
the conduct of such activity. 
Article 826. A Monetary Claim Assigned for Financing Purposes 
1. Both the monetary claim, whose date of payment has already ensured (existing claim) and the 
right to receive pecuniary means which will arise in the future (future claim) may be a subject of 
assignment for which financing is granted. 
The monetary claim that is the subject of the assignment shall be defined in the contract of the client 
with the financial agent in a way that makes it possible to identify the existing claim at the time of 
concluding the contract, while the future claim - not later than at the time of its rise. 
2. In case of assignment of a future monetary claim the latter shall be deemed to be passed to the 
financial agent for the emergence of the right to receive pecuniary means from the debtor, which are the 
subject of the assignment of the claim, stipulated by the contract. If the assignment of a monetary claim is 
conditioned by a definite occurrence, it shall enter into force after the advent of this occurrence. 
Additional formalization of the assignment of a monetary claim shall not be required in these cases. 
Article 827. The Client's Liability to the Financial Agent 
1. Unless the contract of financing against the assignment of a monetary claim provides otherwise, 
the client shall bear liability to the financial agent for the reality of the monetary claim that is the subject 
of the assignment. 
2. The monetary claim which is the subject of assignment shall be recognized as actual, if the client 
has the right to transfer the monetary claim and if at the time of the assignment of this claim he is not 
aware of the circumstances in consequence of which the debtor has the right not to execute it. 
3. A client shall not be answerable for the non-fulfilment or improper fulfilment by the debtor of the 
claim which is the subject of assignment in case the financial agent presents it for execution, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the contract between the client and the financial agent. 
Article 828. Invalidity of the Ban on the Assignment of a Monetary Claim 
1. The assignment of a monetary claim to the financial agent shall be actual, if even there is an 
agreement on its ban or restriction between the client and his debtor. 
2. The provision established by Item 1 of this Article shall not release the client from obligations or 
liability to the debtor in connection with the assignment of the claim in violation of the existing 
agreement between them on its ban or restriction. 
Article 829. The Subsequent Assignment of a Monetary Claim 
The subsequent assignment of a monetary claim shall not be allowed by the financial agent, unless 
the contract of financing against the assignment of the monetary claim provides for otherwise. 
In case where the contract allows for the subsequent assignment of a monetary claim, the provisions 
of this Chapter shall be accordingly applicable to it. 
Article 830. The Execution of a Monetary Claim by the Debtor to the Financial 
Agent 
1. The debtor shall be obliged to make a payment to the financial agent, provided that he has 
received from the client or the financial agent a written notification about the assignment of a monetary 
claim to this financial agent and that the notification defines the monetary claim subject to execution, and 
also indicates the financial agent to whom payment is to be made. 
2. At debtor's request the financial agent shall be obliged to submit to the debtor within a reasonable 
period of time evidence of the fact that the assignment of the monetary claim has in fact taken place. If 
the financial agent fails to execute this obligation, the debtor shall have the right to make payment to the 
client in pursuance of his obligation to the latter. 
3. The execution of the monetary claim by the debtor to the financial agent in keeping with the rules 
of this Article shall release the debtor from the relevant obligation to the client. 
Article 831. The Rights of the Financial Agent to the Amounts Received from 
the Debtor 
1. If under the contract of financing against the assignment of a monetary claim the client shall be 
financed by means of buying from his this claim by the financial agent, the latter shall acquire the right to 
all the sums of money he will receive from the debtor in fulfilment of the claim, while the client shall bear 
no liability to the financial agent for the fact that the received sums of money have proved to be less than 
the price for which the agent has bought the claim. 
2. If a monetary claim has been assigned to the financial agent for the purpose of providing the 
execution of the client's obligation for him and unless the contract of financing against the assignment of 
the claim stipulates otherwise, the financial agent shall be obliged to submit his account to the client and 
transfer to him the sum of money exceeding the sum of the debt of the client, secured by the assignment 
of the claim. If the pecuniary means received by the financial agent from the debtor have proved to be 
less than the amount of the debt of the client to the financial agent, secured by the assignment of the 
claim, the client shall remain liable to the financial agent for the remainder of the debt. 
Article 832. Counter Claims of the Debtor 
1. If the financial agent applies to the debtor with the claim for payment, the debtor shall have the 
right, in keeping with Articles 410 - 412 of this Code, to present for the offset his monetary claims based 
on the contract with the client, which the debtor had by the time when he received the notice about the 
assignment of the claim to the financial agent. 
2. The claims which the debtor could present to the client in connection with the breach by the latter 
of the agreement on the ban on the restriction of the assignment of the claim shall be invalid in respect of 
the financial agent. 
Article 833. The Return to the Debtor of the Amounts Received by the Financial 
Agent 
1. In case where the client has breached his obligations under the contract concluded with the 
debtor, the latter shall have no right to demand from the financial agent the return of the sums of money 
paid to him under the claim that has passed to the financial agent, if the debtor has the right to receive 
such sums of money directly from the client. 
2. The debtor, who has the right to receive directly from the client the amounts paid to the financial 
agent as a result of the assignment of the claim, shall have nevertheless the right to demand the return of 
these sums of money by the financial agent, if it is proved that the latter has failed to execute his 
obligation to effect for the client the promised payment, associated with the assignment of the claim, or 
has made such payment, knowing about the breach by the client of that obligation to the debtor to which 
the payment, associated with the assignment of the claim, refers. 
Chapter 44. Bank Deposit 
Article 834. The Bank Deposit Agreement 
1. Under the bank deposit agreement one party (the bank), which has received the monetary sum 
(deposit) from the other party (depositor) or the receipts due to it (deposit), shall undertake to return the 
amount of the deposit and pay interest on it on the terms and in the procedure specified by the agreement. 
2. The bank deposit agreement in which a private person is a depositor shall be deemed to be a 
public agreement (Article 426). 
3. The rules of the bank deposit agreement (Chapter 45) shall be applicable to the relations between 
the bank and the depositor involved in the account on which the deposit has been placed, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the rules of this Chapter or unless the contrary follows from the substance of the bank 
deposit agreement. 
Legal entities shall have no right to transmit pecuniary means held in deposits to other persons. 
4. The rules of this Chapter relating to bank shall also be applicable to other credit organizations 
which accept deposits from legal entities in keeping with the law. 
Article 835. The Right of Attraction of Monetary Means for Making Deposits 
1. The right to attract monetary means for making deposits shall belong to the banks to which such 
right has been accorded in conformity with the permit (license), issued in the statutory procedure. 
See Law of the RSFSR on Banks and Banking Activities in wording of February 3, 1996 
2. If a deposit is accepted from an individual by the person who has no right to do so or in 
contravention of the procedure, established by the law or by the bank rules adopted in accordance with it, 
the depositor may demand the immediate return of the amount of the deposit, and also the payment of the 
relevant interest, stipulated by Article 395 of this Code, and the reimbursement of all the losses caused to 
the investor over and above the amount of interest. 
If such person has accepted the pecuniary means of a legal entity on the terms of the bank deposit 
agreement, such agreement shall be null and void (Article 168). 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the law, the consequences, provided for by Item 2 of this Article, 
shall also be applicable in the cases of: 
the attraction of monetary resources of individuals and legal entities by means of sale to them of 
shares and other securities whose issue has been recognized as illegal; 
the attraction of monetary resources of individuals for making deposits against the bills or other 
securities which exclude the receipt of their holders of their deposits as soon as demanded and the 
exercise by the depositors of other rights, envisaged by the rules of this Chapter. 
Article 836. The Form of the Bank Deposit Agreement 
1. A bank deposit agreement shall be concluded in writing. 
The written form of a bank deposit agreement shall be deemed to be observed, if the placement of a 
deposit is certified with a savings book, a savings or deposit certificate, or with any other document 
issued by the bank to the depositor which complies with the requirements, stipulated by the law for such 
documents, introduced by the bank rules in conformity with the law and applicable in banking practice by 
the customs of business turnover. 
2. Non-observance of the written form of the bank deposit agreement shall invalidate this 
agreement. Such agreement shall be void. 
Article 837. Types of Deposits 
1. A bank deposit agreement shall be concluded on the terms of the issue of a deposit as soon as 
demanded (deposit at short notice) or on the terms of the return of a deposit upon the expiry of the period 
of time specified by the agreement (time fixed deposit). 
The agreement may provide for the placement of deposits on the different terms of their return 
which are not inconsistent with the law. 
2. Under the agreement of a bank deposit of any type the bank shall be obliged to issue the sum of 
the deposit or part thereof as soon as demanded by the depositor, except for the deposits placed by legal 
entities on different terms of return, provided for by the agreement. 
The agreement's proviso about the refusal by an individual to receive his deposit as soon as he 
demanded shall be void. 
3. In cases where a time deposit or any deposit other than a call deposit shall be returned to its 
holder as soon as he demanded before the expiry of the term or the onset of other circumstances, indicated 
in the bank deposit agreement, interest on deposits shall be paid out in the amount corresponding to the 
rate of interest paid out by the banks for deposits at short notice, unless the agreement provides for a 
different amount of interest. 
4. In cases where the depositor does not demand the return of the sum of his time fixed deposit upon 
the expiry of the term or the sum of the deposit placed by him on the different conditions of return, upon 
the onset of the circumstances, specified by the agreement, the agreement shall be deemed to be 
prolonged on the terms of the call deposit, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement. 
Article 838. Interest on Deposits 
1. The bank shall pay out to a depositor interest on his deposit in the amount defined by the bank 
deposit agreement. 
In the absence in the agreement of a clause on the rate of interest to be paid out the bank shall be 
obliged to pay out interest in the amount, defined in accordance with Item 1 of Article 809 of this Code. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the bank deposit agreement, the bank shall have the right to 
change the rate of interest paid out on the call deposits. 
If the bank increases the rate of interest, the new interest rate shall be applied to the deposits made 
before the announcement on the diminution of the interest rate to depositors, upon the expiry of the month 
since the time of the relevant announcement, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
3. The interest rate, defined by the bank deposit agreement on the deposit made by a private person 
on the terms of its issue upon the expiry of a definite time or upon the onset of the circumstances 
provided for by the agreement, may not be decreased by the bank unilaterally, unless otherwise stipulated 
by the law. Under such bank deposit agreement, concluded by the bank with a legal entity, the interest 
rate may not be changed unilaterally, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the agreement. 
Article 839. Procedure for Adding Interest on Deposits and Its Payment 
Federal Law No. 22-FZ of March 21, 2005 amended Item 1 of Article 839 of Part 2 of this Code 
See the previous text of the Item 
1. Interest on the sum of a bank deposit shall be added from the day that follows the day of its 
receipt by the bank until the day of its return to the depositor inclusive, and if it has been withdrawn from 
the account of the depositor on other bases, then until the day of the withdrawal inclusive. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the bank deposit agreement, interest on the sum of the bank 
deposit shall be paid out to the depositor on his demand upon the expiry of each quarter separately from 
the amount of the deposit, while the uncalled interest shall increase the amount of the deposit on which 
interest is cast. 
In case of the return of a deposit all the interest added by this time shall be paid off. 
Article 840. Security for the Return of a Deposit 
1. The banks shall be obliged to secure the return of deposits of private persons through obligatory 
insurance or by other methods in cases specified by the law. 
The return of deposits of private persons by the bank in whose statutory capital over 50 per cent of 
shares or participating interest belongs to the Russian Federation and/or the subjects of the Russian 
Federation, and also to municipal bodies shall be, furthermore, guaranteed by their subsidiary liability 
according to the demands of the investor to the bank in the procedure, envisaged by Article 399 of this 
Code. 
2. Methods of the bank's security for the return of deposits of legal entities shall be defined by the 
bank deposit agreement. 
3. During the conclusion of a bank deposit agreement the bank shall be obliged to provide the 
depositor with information about the secured return of the deposit. 
4. If the bank fails to discharge the obligation of securing the return of a deposit, envisaged by the 
law or the bank deposit agreement, and also in case of the loss of security or the deterioration of its 
conditions the depositor shall have the right to demand that the bank should immediately return the sum 
of the deposit, pay out interest in the amount, defined in conformity with Item 1 of Article 809 of this 
Code and indemnify the caused losses. 
Article 841. The Placement of Monetary Means by Third Persons on the 
Depositor's Account 
Unless otherwise stipulated by the bank deposit agreement, the account of the depositor shall 
receive the monetary means credited to the bank's account by third persons with an indication of the 
essential data on his deposit account. In this case it is supposed that the depositor has expressed his 
consent with the receipt of monetary means from such persons and furnished to them the essential data on 
the deposit account. 
Article 842. Deposits in Favour of Third Persons 
1. A deposit may be in the bank in favour of a definite third person. Unless otherwise stipulated by 
the bank deposit agreement, such person shall acquire the depositor's rights since the time of presenting to 
the bank the first claim based on these rights or expressing his intention of availing himself of such rights 
by any other method. 
The indication of the name of an individual (Article 19) or the name of a legal entity (Article 54) in 
whose favour a deposit is made is an essential condition of the relevant bank deposit agreement. 
The bank deposit agreement in favour of the individual who died at the time of the conclusion of the 
agreement or at the time of the non-existence of the legal entity shall be void. 
2. Before the third person expresses his intention to avail himself of the depositor's rights, the person 
who has concluded a bank deposit agreement may avail himself of the depositor's rights in respect of 
monetary means placed on the deposit account. 
3. The rules for the agreement in favour of the third person (Article 430) shall be applicable to the 
bank deposit agreement in favour of the third person, unless this contradicts the rules of this Article and 
the substance of the bank deposit. 
Article 843. The Savings Book 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the arrangement of the parties, the conclusion of a bank deposit 
agreement with a private person and the placement of monetary means on his deposit account shall be 
certified by a savings book. The bank deposit agreement may provide for the issue of a registered savings 
book or a savings book to bearer. The savings book to bearer shall be a security. 
The savings book shall indicate and certify by the bank its name and place of location (Article 54), 
and if a deposit is made in its branch, this book shall also indicate the name and place of its branch, the 
deposit account number, and also all the sums of money charged to the account, all the sums of money 
written off the account, and the remainder of cash on the account at the time of presenting the savings 
book to the bank. 
Unless a different condition of the deposit is proved, the data on the deposit contained in the savings 
book shall be aground for settlements between the bank and the depositor. 
2. The payment of a deposit and interest on it and the fulfilment of the instructions of the depositor 
on the transfer of money from the deposit account to other persons shall be effected by the bank upon the 
production of the savings book. 
If the registered savings book has been lost or brought into a faulty state for presentation, the bank 
shall give to the depositor a new savings book upon his application. 
The rights under the lost savings book to bearer shall be restored in the procedure, envisaged for 
securities to bearer (Article 148). 
Article 844. The Savings (Deposit) Certificate 
1. The savings (deposit) certificate shall be a security that certified the sum of the deposit made in 
the bank and the rights of the depositor (certificate holder) to the receipt of the amount of the deposit 
upon the expiry of the fixed time and of the deposit upon the expiry of the fixed time and of interest 
stipulated by the certificate in the bank which has issued the certificate or in any branch of this bank. 
2. Savings (deposit) certificates may be registered or to bearer. 
3. In case of the anticipatory presentation of a savings (deposit) certificate for payment the bank 
shall pay off the sum of the deposit and interest on it, paid out in call deposits, unless the certificate 
conditions provide for a different interest rate. 
Chapter 45. Bank Account 
On Some Issues From the Practice of Consideration of Disputes Involving Conclusion, Execution and 
Cancellation of Contracts of Bank Account see the Decision of the Plenum of the Higher Arbitration 
Court of the Russian Federation No. 5 of April 19, 1999  
Article 845. The Bank Account Agreement 
1. Under the bank account agreement the bank shall undertake to charge cash to the account opened 
for a client (account holder), to implement the client's instructions on his transfer to, and the withdrawal 
of, relevant sums of money from the account and on other operations with the account. 
2. The bank may use the monetary means placed on the account, while guaranteeing the client's 
right to make use of these means. 
3. The bank shall have no right to determine and control the trends of using the client's monetary 
funds and introduce other restrictions on his right to dispose of cash at his discretion which are not 
provided by the law or the bank account agreement. 
4. The rules of this Chapter relating to the banks shall also be applicable to other credit 
organizations in case of the conclusion and execution of the bank account agreement in conformity with 
the issued permit (license). 
Article 846. The Conclusion of a Bank Account Agreement 
1. With the conclusion of a bank account agreement an account shall be opened with a bank for the 
client or the person indicated by him on the terms, agreed upon by the parties. 
2. The bank shall be obliged to conclude a bank account agreement with the client who has made his 
offer to open an account on the conditions announced by the bank for the accounts of the given type, 
which meet the requirements of the law and the bank rules, established in conformity with it. 
The bank shall have no right to refuse to open an account, the corresponding operations with which 
are stipulated by the law, the constituent instruments of the bank and the permit (license) issue to it, 
except for the cases where such refusal has been caused by the bank's lack of the possibility to accept the 
account for banking servicing or is admitted by the law or other legal acts. 
If the bank evades from the conclusion of a bank account agreement on a groundless basis, the client 
shall have the right to present to it his claims, provided for by Item 4 of Article 445 of this Code. 
Article 847. The Certification of the Right to Dispose of Cash Placed on the 
Account 
1. The rights of the persons who implement the instructions of the client on the transfer and payment 
of cash from the account shall be certified by the client by means of presenting to the bank of statutory 
documents in conformity with the bank rules established by the law and the bank account agreement. 
2. The client may give instructions to the bank on the write off of cash from the account on the 
demand of third persons, including t instructions connected with the performance by the client of his 
obligations to these persons. The bank shall accept these instructions, provided they indicate in writing 
the necessary data which make it possible to identify the person who has the right to present the relevant 
claim. 
3. The agreement may provide for the certification of rights of disposing of cash placed on the 
account by the electronic payment facilities and by other documents with the use in them of the analogues 
of the autograph (Item 2 of Article 160), codes, passwords and other means confirming that instructions 
have been given by the person authorized therefor. 
Article 848. Bank Operations with Accounts 
The bank shall be obliged to perform operations for the client, which are provided for the accounts 
of the given types by the law, the bank rules established by law and the customs of business turnover 
applicable in banking practice, unless otherwise stipulated by the bank account agreement. 
Article 849. Time-limits for Operations with Accounts 
The bank shall be obliged to charge cash placed on the client's account within the day that follows 
the day of the receipt by the bank of the relevant payment document, unless the bank account agreement 
provides for a shorter period. 
The bank shall be obliged to pay out cash or transfer it from the depositor's account within the day 
that follows the day of the receipt by the bank of the relevant payment document, unless the law, the bank 
rules introduced in accordance with it or the bank account agreement provide for different time-limits. 
Article 850. Account Crediting 
1. In cases where in conformity with the bank account agreement the bank makes payments from the 
account despite the absence of monetary means (account crediting), the bank shall be deemed to grant to a 
client a credit in the appropriate amount since the day such payment was effected. 
2. The rights and obligations of the parties associated with account crediting shall be determined by 
the rules for loans and credits (Chapter 42), unless the bank account agreement provides otherwise. 
Article 851. The Payment of Banking Expenses on Operations with Accounts 
1. In cases specified by the bank account agreement the client shall pay for the bank's services 
involved in the operations with cash placed on the account. 
2. A charge for the bank's services, provided for by Item 1 of this Article, may be collected by the 
bank upon the expiry of each quarter from the monetary means of the client placed on the account, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the bank account agreement. 
Article 852. Interest Paid by the Bank for the Use of Cash on Accounts 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the bank account agreement, the bank shall pay interest, the 
amount of which is charged to the client's account, for the use of cash placed on this account. 
The amount of interest shall be placed on the account within the periods of time, provided for by the 
agreement, and upon the expiry of each quarter in case where such time-limits are not envisaged by the 
agreement. 
2. Interest, referred to in Item 1 of this Article, shall be paid by the bank in the amount to be defined 
by the bank account agreement, while in the absence of a relevant clause in the agreement interest shall be 
paid in the amount, usually paid by the bank for call accounts (Article 838). 
Article 853. The Offsetting of the Counter Claims of the Bank and the Client 
The bank's monetary claims to the client, associated with account crediting (Article 850) and the 
payment for the bank's services (Article 851), and also the client's claims to the bank on the payment of 
interest for the use of cash (Article 852) shall be terminated by offsetting (Article 410), unless otherwise 
stipulated by the bank account agreement. 
Said claims shall be offset by the bank. The bank shall be obliged to inform the client about the 
offset in the procedure and in the period of time envisaged by the agreement, but if the appropriate 
conditions are not agreed upon by the parties, the bank shall be obliged to inform the client about the 
offset in the procedure and in the periods of time which are common for the banking practice of providing 
clients with information about the state of cash in the relevant account. 
Article 854. The Grounds for Writing off Cash from the Account 
1. The bank shall write off cash from the client's account on the basis of his instructions. 
2. Without the client's instructions cash kept on his account may be written off by a court decision, 
and also in cases, established by the law or envisaged by the agreement between the bank and the client. 
About writing off the monetary funds that are on an account without the order of the customer see 
Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 8 of October 1, 
1996 
On the procedure for the recovery by creditor of sums acknowledged by debtor when a contract 
provides for complaint procedure see Letter of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation 
No. 6 of July 25, 1996  
Article 855. The Sequence of Writing off Cash from the Account 
1. In the presence in the account of cash whose amount is sufficient to meet all the claims to the 
account, this cash shall be written off from the account in the procedure of the receipt of the client's 
instructions and other documents for writing off (calendar sequence), unless otherwise stipulated by the 
law. 
Federal Law No. 133-FZ of October 24, 1997 amended Item 2 of Article 855 of this Civil Code  
see the previous text of the Item 
2. If cash is insufficient in the account to meet all the claims made to it, this cash shall be written off 
in the following sequence: 
in the first place cash is written off according to the executive documents which provide for the 
transfer or issue of cash from the account to meet claims for the reparation of harm inflicted on human 
life and health, and also claims for the recovery of alimony; 
in the second place, cash is written off according to the executive documents which provide for the 
transfer or issue of cash for settlements in the payment of dismissal benefits and labour remuneration with 
the persons working under a labour contract and in the payment of fees under the author's contract; 
Federal Law No. 8-FZ of January 10, 2003 amended paragraph 4 of Item 2 of Article 855 of this 
Code. The amendments shall enter into force after an expiry of one month as of the day of the official 
publication of the said Federal Law  
See the previous text of the paragraph 
Decision of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation No. 21-P of December 23, 1997 
recognized as not being in compliance with the Constitution of the Russian Federation, Article 19 (Part 
1) thereof, the provision of paragraph 4 of Item 2 of Article 855 of the Civil Code of the Russian 
Federation  
Federal Law No. 173-FZ of December 23, 2004 established that, when there are not enough monetary 
funds on a tax payer's account for satisfying all claims made thereto, monetary funds shall be written 
off on the basis of settlement documents providing for payments to budgets of all levels of the budget 
system of the Russian Federation, including budgets of governmental off-budget funds, as well as 
monetary funds for paying wages to persons working under labour contracts, shall be remitted or paid, 
in the calendar order of these documents receipt after remittance of the payments made in compliance 
with the said Article of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, in the first and second turn  
in the third place there shall be carried out the write-off on the payment documents stipulating the 
transfer or issuance of monetary funds for the settlements in the remuneration of labour with the persons 
working under a labour agreement (contact), and also on the allocations to the Pension Funds of the 
Russian Federation, the Social Insurance Fund of the Russian Federation and the funds of the obligatory 
medical insurance; 
in the fourth place there shall be carried out the write-off on the payment documents stipulating the 
payments to the budget and the non-budgetary funds the allocations to which are not stipulated in the 
third place; 
According to Federal Law No. 100-FZ of July 14, 1997 the organizations, which buy products from 
the agricultural commodity producers, shall pay their cost in the priority order after the payment of the 
taxes to the all-level budgets, of the contributions into the Pension Fund of the Russian Federation, into 
the Federal Fund of Obligatory Medical Insurance, into the State Fund of Employment of the 
Population of the Russian Federation, and into the Social Insurance Fund of the Russian Federation  
in the fifth place, cash is written off according to the executive documents providing for the 
satisfaction of other monetary claims; 
in the sixth place, cash is written off according to the payment documents in the order of calendar 
sequence. 
Cash shall be written off from the account according to the claims of one turn in the order of the 
calendar priority of the receipt of documents. 
Article 856. The Bank's Liability for Improper Performance of Operations with 
the Account 
In cases where cash is charged to the client's account untimely or where the bank has written it off 
from the account groundlessly, and also of the non-fulfilment of the client's instructions on the transfer of 
cash from the account or on the withdrawal of cash from the account, the bank shall be obliged to pay 
interest on this sum in the order and in the amount, prescribed by Article 395 of his Code. 
Article 857. The Bank Secrecy 
On the bank secrecy also see Law of the RSFSR on Banks and Banking Activities in wording of 
February 3, 1996 
1. The bank shall guarantee the secrecy of a bank account and a bank deposit, operations with the 
account and information about clients. 
Federal Law No. 219-FZ of December 30, 2004 reworded Item 2 of Article 857 of this Code. The 
amendments shall enter into force from June 1, 2005 
See the previous text of the Item 
2. Information constituting a banking secret can be provided only to the clients themselves or their 
representatives, and also provided to credit bureaus on the grounds and in the procedure provided for by a 
law. Such information can be provided to State bodies and their officials only in cases and in the 
procedure provided for by a law. 
3. In case the bank divulges information constituting the bank's secrecy, the client whose rights have 
been infringed shall have the right to demand compensation for the losses caused. 
Article 858. Restriction on the Disposal of Accounts 
No restriction shall be allowed on the client's rights of disposing of cash on his account, exception 
being made for the attachment on cash kept in the account or for the suspension of account operations in 
cases, stipulated by the Law. 
Article 859. The Dissolution of a Bank Account Agreement 
1. A bank account agreement shall be dissolved by the client's application at any time. 
Federal Law No. 89-FZ of July 18, 2005 supplemented Article 859 of this Code with Item 1.1. The 
amendments shall extend to the relations rising from the contracts of bank account made prior to the 
entry of said Federal Law into force  
1.1. If not otherwise provided for by a contract, a bank shall be entitled to refuse to execute a 
contract of bank account, having warned the client on it in writing, if within two years there are no 
monetary funds on the client's account and there are not transactions made on it. The contract of bank 
account shall be deemed dissolved upon the expiry of two months as of the date of directing such warning 
by a bank, provided that within this time period monetary funds are not entered to the client's account. 
2. On the bank's demand the bank account agreement may be cancelled by the court in the following 
cases: 
where the sum of money placed on the client's account proves to be below the minimum amount, 
envisaged by the bank rules or the agreement, unless such sum is restored during one month since the day 
of the bank's warning about this; 
in the absence of operations with the account during one year, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
agreement. 
3. The remainder of cash on the account shall be given to the client or transferred to another account 
by his instructions within seven days after the receipt of the client's relevant written application. 
4. The dissolution of bank account agreement shall be a ground for the closing of the client's 
account. 
Article 860. Bank Accounts 
The rules of this Chapter shall extend to correspondent accounts, correspondent subaccounts, other 
bank accounts, unless otherwise stipulated by the law, other legal acts or the bank rules, introduced in 
accordance with them. 
Chapter 46. Payments 
_ 1. General Provisions on Payments 
Article 861. Cash and Cashless Payments 
1. Payments with the participation of private persons, not connected with their business, may be 
effected in cash (Article 140) without the limitation of the sum of money or non-cash. 
2. Settlements between legal entities, and also payments with the participation of individuals, 
associated with their business, shall be effected in non-cash. Settlements between these legal entities may 
be effected in cash, unless otherwise stipulated by the law. 
3. Clearing settlements shall be made through banks and other credit organizations (hereinafter 
referred to as the banks) which have opened relevant accounts, unless the contrary follows from the law 
and is conditioned by the usable form of payments. 
Article 862. The Forms of Cashless Payments 
1. Cashless payments may assume the following forms: payments by written order, by letters of 
credit, by cheques, for collection, and also payments in other forms prescribed by the law, the bank rules 
established in conformity with it and by the business turnover customs, used in banking practice. 
2. The parties to the contract shall have the right to choose and fix in this contract any form of 
payments, referred to in Item 1 of this Article. 
On the Procedure for Credit Organizations' Issuing Bank Cards and Implementing Settlements under 
the Transactions Executed through the Use Thereof see Regulations of the Central Bank of Russia No. 
23-P of April 9, 1998  
_ 2. Payments by Written Order 
Article 863. General Provisions on Payments by Written Order 
1. In case of payments by written order the bank shall undertake to transfer a definite sum of money 
on the order of the payer from the monetary means kept in his account to the account of the person 
indicated by the payer in this or that bank within the period of time, prescribed by the law or fixed in 
accordance with it, unless the bank account agreement provides for a shorter period or the business 
turnover customs used in banking practice define it. 
2. The rules of this paragraph shall be applied to the relations, connected with the transfer of cash 
via the bank by the person who has not his account in this bank, unless otherwise stipulated by the law 
and the bank rules introduced in conformity with it or unless the contrary follows from the substance of 
these relations. 
3. The procedure for making payments by written order shall be regulated by the law, and also by 
the bank rules introduced in conformity with it and the business turnover customs used in banking 
practice. 
Article 864. The Conditions for the Execution of Payment Order by the Bank 
1. The content of the payment order and the settlement documents submitted together with it and 
their form shall comply with the requirements of the law and the bank rules, established in keeping with 
it. 
2. If a payment order fails to comply with the requirements of Item 1 of this Article, the bank may 
clarify the content of he order. Such inquiry shall me bade to the payer without delay, upon the receipt of 
the order. If no answer has been received within the period, prescribed by the law or the bank rules 
introduced in keeping with it, and in their absence - within the reasonable period the bank may leave the 
order without execution and return it to the payer, unless otherwise stipulated by the law, the bank rules 
introduced in accordance with it or by the agreement between the bank and the payer. 
3. The payer's order shall be executed by the bank in the presence of cash in the payer's account, 
unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement between payer and the bank. Orders shall be executed by the 
bank with the observance of sequence of writing off cash from the account (Article 855). 
Article 865. The Execution of the Payer's Order 
1. The bank which has accepted the payer's payment order shall be obliged to transfer the relevant 
sum of money to the bank of the recipient of money for its charge to the account of the person, indicated 
in the order, within the time, fixed by Item 1 of Article 863 of this Code. 
2. The bank shall have the right to draw other banks in the operations of transmitting cash to the 
account indicated by the client's order. 
3. The bank shall be obliged to immediately inform the payer at his request about the execution of 
the order. Procedure for drawing up a notification about the execution of the order and requirements for 
its content shall be envisaged by the law, the bank rules introduced in accordance with it or by the 
agreement of the parties. 
Article 866. Liability for Non-fulfilment or Improper Fulfilment of the Client's 
Order 
1. In case of non-fulfilment or improper fulfilment of the client's order the bank shall bear liability 
on the grounds and in the amounts, prescribed by Chapter 25 of this Code. 
2. In cases of non-fulfilment or improper fulfilment of the client's order in connection with the 
breach of the rules for settlement operations by the bank which has been drawn in the execution of the 
payer's order, the liability, envisaged by Item 1 of this Article, may be vested by a court of law on this 
bank. 
3. If the breach of the rules for settlement operations by the bank has involved the unlawful 
withholding of cash, the bank shall be obliged to pay interest in the procedure and in the amount, 
prescribed by Article 395 of this Code. 
_ 3. Payments by Letters of Credit 
On overview of settlement of disputes involving payments by letter of credit see Letter of the Presidium 
of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 39 of January 15, 1999  
Article 867. General Provisions on Payments by a Letter of Credit 
1. In payments by a letter of credit the bank acting on behalf of the payer in the opening of the letter 
of credit and in accordance with his instruction (the bank of circulation) shall undertake to make 
payments to the recipient of cash to retire, accept or discount a bill of exchange, or to instruct another 
bank (executing bank) to effect payments to the recipient of cash or to retire, accept or discount a bill of 
exchange. 
The rules for the executing bank shall be applicable to the bank of circulation that makes payments 
to the recipient of cash or retires, accepts or discounts the bill of exchange. 
2. At the time of opening a covered (deposited) letter of credit the bank of circulation shall be 
obliged to transfer the amount of the letter of credit (payment) at the expense of the payer or to place the 
credit given to him at the disposal of the executing bank for the entire period of validity of the obligation 
of the bank of circulation. 
In case of opening an uncovered (guaranteed) letter of credit the executing bank shall be given the 
right to charge off the entire sum of the letter of credit from the account kept by the bank of circulation. 
3. Procedure for making payments by a letter of credit shall be regulated by the law, and also by the 
bank rules introduced in accordance with it, and by the business turnover customs applicable in banking 
practice. 
On the procedure for making payments by a letter of credit see the Regulations on Payments by 
Written Order in the Russian Federation carryed into effect by the Letter of the Central Bank of the 
Russian Federation No. 14 of July 9, 1992 
Article 868. The Revocable Letter of Credit 
1. A letter of credit which can be changed or cancelled by the bank of circulation without a 
preliminary notification of the recipient of cash shall be recognized as revocable. The revocation of a 
letter of credit shall not create any obligations for the bank of circulation to the recipient of cash. 
2. The executing bank shall be obliged to make payments or carry on other operations with the 
revocable letter of credit, if by the time of their conduct it had not received a notice about the change of 
the terms of the letter of credit of its cancellation. 
3. A letter of credit shall be revocable, unless otherwise stipulated expressly in its text. 
Article 869. The Irrevocable Letter of Credit 
1. A letter of credit which cannot be cancelled without the consent of the recipient of cash shall be 
recognized as irrevocable. 
2. At the request of the bank of circulation the executing bank that takes part in the operation with a 
letter may confirm an irrevocable letter of credit (confirmed letter of credit). Such confirmation shall 
An irrevocable letter of credit confirmed by the executing bank may not be changed or cancelled 
without the consent of this bank. 
Article 870. The Execution of the Letter of Credit 
1. In order to execute a letter of credit, the recipient of cash shall submit to the executing bank 
documents confirming the fulfilment of all the terms of the letter of credit. If one of these terms is 
contravened, the letter of credit shall not be executed. 
2. If the executing bank has made a payment or carried out a different transaction in keeping with 
the terms of the letter of credit, the bank of circulation shall be obliged to compensate for the expenses 
incurred. Said expenses, and also all other expenses of the bank of circulation, incurred in the execution 
of the letter of credit, shall be recompensed by the payer. 
Article 871. The Refusal to Accept Documents 
1. If the executing bank refuses to accept documents which do not comply with the terms of the 
letter of credit according to external signs, it shall be obliged to inform forthwith the recipient of cash and 
the bank of circulation with an indication of the reasons for the refusal. 
2. If the bank of circulation, which has received the documents accepted by the executing bank, 
holds that they do not correspond to the terms of the letter of credit according to the external signs, it shall 
have the right to refuse to accept them and demand from the executing bank the sum of money paid to the 
recipient of cash with the contravention of the terms of the letter of credit and to refuse to recompense the 
paid sums of money under the uncovered letter of credit. 
Article 872. The Bank's Liability for Breaking the Terms of a Letter of Credit 
1. Liability for breaking the terms of a letter of credit to the payer shall be borne by the bank of 
circulation, while such liability to the bank of circulation shall be borne by the executing bank, except for 
the cases, provided for by this Article. 
2. In the event of a groundless refusal by the executing bank to pay out cash under the covered or 
confirmed letter of credit, the liability to the recipient of cash may be entrusted to the executing bank. 
3. In case of a wrong payment of cash by the executing bank under the covered or confirmed letter 
of credit in consequence of breaking its terms, the liability to the payer may be entrusted with the 
executing bank. 
Article 873. The Closing of the Letter of Credit 
1. The executing bank shall close letters of credit in the cases of: 
the expiry of the validity term of a letter of credit; 
the application by the recipient of cash on the refusal to make use of a letter of credit before the 
expiry of its validity term, if the letter of credit provides for the possibility of such refusal; 
the demand of the payer for a full or partial revocation of a letter of credit, if such revocation is 
possible under the terms of the letter of credit. 
The executing bank shall be obliged to inform the bank of circulation about the closing of the letter 
of credit. 
2. The non-used amount of the covered letter of credit shall be subject to return to the bank of 
circulation without delay simultaneously with the closing of the letter of credit. The bank of circulation 
shall be obliged to charge the returned sums of money to the payer's account from which cash has been 
deposited. 
_ 4. Payments for Collection 
On overview of settlement of disputes involving payments by collection see Letter of the Presidium of 
the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 39 of January 15, 1999  
Article 874. General Provisions on Payments for Collection 
1. In payment for collection the bank (bank of circulation) shall undertake to carry out actions 
involved in the receipt of payment and/or acceptance of payment on the order of the client and at his 
expense. 
2. The bank of circulation which has received the client's order shall have the right to draw another 
bank (executing bank) for its implementation. 
Procedure for making payment for collection shall be regulated by the law, the bank rules 
introduced in keeping with it and by the business turnover customs applicable in banking practice. 
3. In case of default on the client's order or improper execution the bank of circulation shall bear 
liability to it on the grounds and in the amount, prescribed by Chapter 25 of this Code. 
If the client's order has not been executed or executed improperly due to the infringement of the 
rules for payment operations by the executing bank, the liability to the client may be placed on this bank. 
Article 875. The Execution of a Collection Order 
1. In the absence of any document or in case of the non-conformity of documents with the collection 
order by their external signs the executing bank shall be obliged forthwith to inform about this the person 
from whom it has received the collection order. In the event of non-removal of said drawbacks the bank 
shall have the right to return the documents without execution. 
2. Documents shall be submitted to the payer in the form in which they have been received with the 
exception of bank notes and endorsements needed for the formalization of a collection transaction. 
3. If documents are subject to payment at sign, the executing bank shall present them for payment 
immediately upon the receipt of a collection order. 
If documents are subject to payment at other time, the executing bank shall present documents for 
acceptance for the receipt of the payer's acceptance immediately upon the receipt of the collection order, 
while the claim for payment shall be made not later than the day of the onset of the payment date, 
indicated in the document. 
4. Partial payments may be accepted in cases where this is provided for by the bank rules or in the 
presence of a special permit in the collection order. 
5. The received (collected) amounts shall be immediately placed by the executing bank at the 
disposal of the bank of circulation, which is duty-bound to charge these amounts to the client's account. 
The executing bank shall have the right to withhold from the collected amounts the fees due to it and the 
compensation for expenses. 
Article 876. Notice of Transactions Made 
1. If payment and/or acceptance have not been received, the executing bank shall be obliged to 
inform at once the bank of circulation about the reasons for non-payment or for the refusal from 
acceptance. 
The bank of circulation shall be obliged to inform the client about this immediately and inquire 
about its directions on further actions. 
2. In the event it has failed to receive directions about further actions within the time-limit fixed by 
the bank rules or within a reasonable period in the absence of this time-limit the executing bank shall 
have the right to return the documents to the bank of circulation. 
_ 5. Payments by Cheques 
Article 877. General Provisions on Payments by Cheques 
1. A cheque shall be recognized to be the security containing the non-stipulated cheque drawer's 
order to the respective bank to effect the payment of the amount of money, indicated in it to the cheque 
holder. 
2. Only the bank where the cheque drawer has money to be disposed of by drawing cheques may be 
indicated as a payer by cheque. 
3. A cheque may not be withdrawn before the expiry of the time for its presentation. 
4. The drawing of a cheque shall not cancel the obligation in the fulfilment of which it has been 
written. 
5. Procedure and conditions for the use of cheques in payment transactions shall be regulated by this 
Code and in the part which is not regulated by it they shall be regulated by other laws and the bank rules 
established in accordance with them. 
Article 878. The Essential Elements of the Cheque 
1. The cheque shall contain: 
1) the name "cheque", included in the text of the document; 
2) the order to the payer to pay out a certain sum of money; 
3) the name of the payer and reference to the account from which payment is to be made; 
4) reference to the currency of the payment; 
5) reference to the date and place of writing the cheque; 
6) the signature of the person who has drawn the cheque (cheque drawer). 
The absence of any of said essential elements in the document shall invalidate the cheque. 
A cheque that does not contain the place of its writing shall be regarded as that signed at the place of 
the location of the cheque drawer. 
Reference to interest shall be deemed to be unwritten. 
2. The form of cheques and procedure for its filling in shall be determined by the law and the bank 
rules introduced in keeping with it. 
Article 879. Cheque Payment 
1. A cheque shall be paid at the expense of the cheque drawer's resources. 
If cash is deposited, procedure and conditions for depositing cash to cover cheques shall be 
established by the bank rules. 
2. A cheque shall be liable to payment by the payer, provided that is presented for payment within 
the time-limit fixed by the law. 
3. The payer by cheque shall be obliged to assure himself of the authenticity of the cheque with all 
means at his disposal, and also of the fact that the cheque bearer is a person authorized therefor. 
During the payment of the endorsed cheque the payer shall be obliged to verify whether 
endorsements are correct but shall not check the signatures of endorsers. 
4. The losses incurred due to the payment by the payer for a forged, pilfered or lost cheque shall be 
covered by the payer or the cheque drawer depending through whose fault they have been caused. 
5. A person who has paid the cheque shall have the right to demand it with the receipt for the sum of 
money. 
Article 880. The Assignment of Rights by a Cheque 
1. The rights by a cheque shall be assigned in the order, prescribed by Article 146 of this Code with 
the observance of the rules, provided for by this Article. 
2. A cheque to bearer shall not be subject to transfer. 
3. In an assigned cheque the endorsement in full shall have the force of receipt for the sum of 
money. 
The endorsement made by the payer shall be null and void. 
A person who possesses the assigned cheque, received under the endorsement, shall be deemed to 
be its legitimate holder, if he bases his right on the continuous numbers of endorsements. 
Article 881. Guarantee of Payment 
1. Payment of a cheque may be guaranteed in full or in part by means of its surety. 
The guarantee of payment of a cheque (surety) may be given by any person, except for the payer. 
2. The guarantee shall be put down on the face side of a cheque or on the additional sheet by means 
of endorsement ("regard as guarantee") and the indication of who and for whom it has been given. Unless 
there is no such indication, the guarantee shall be deemed to be given in place of the cheque drawer. 
The guarantee shall be signed by the guarantor with an indication of the place of his residence and 
the date of making an endorsement, and if the guarantor is represented by a legal entity, the guarantee 
shall signed with an indication of its place of location and the date of making an endorsement. 
3. The guarantee shall be liable just as the person in place of whom he has given the guarantee. 
His obligation shall be valid even in the event if the obligation guarantee by him proves to be void 
on any ground other than the non-observance of the form. 
4. The guarantor who has paid the cheque shall acquire the rights that follow from the cheque 
against the person in place of whom he has given the guarantee and against those persons who are 
obligated to the latter. 
Article 882. Collection of a Cheque 
1. The submission of a cheque to the bank which serves the cheque holder for collection in order to 
get payment shall be deemed to be the presentation for payment. 
Cheque payment shall be made in the order, prescribed by Article 875 of this Code. 
2. Cash shall be entered to the cheque holder's account under the collected cheque after the receipt 
of payment from the payer, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement between the cheque holder and 
the bank. 
Article 883. Certification of the Refusal to Pay a Cheque 
1. A refusal to pay a cheque shall be certified by one of the following methods: 
1) by making a protest by the notary or by drawing up an equivalent report in the statutory manner; 
2) by putting down a note by the payer on the cheque to the effect that her refuses to pay it with an 
indication of the date for presenting the cheque for payment; 
3) by putting down a note by the collecting bank with an indication of the date to the effect that the 
cheque has been drawn in due time and dishonored. 
2. A protest or an equivalent report shall be made before the expiry of the time for presenting the 
cheque. 
If the cheque was presented on the last day of the time-limit, a protest or an equivalent report may 
be made on the next working day. 
Article 884. Notification About the Non-payment of a Cheque 
The cheque holder shall be obliged to inform his endorser and cheque drawer about non-payment 
during two working days that follow the day of making the protest or the equivalent report. 
During two working days that follows the day of the receipt of the notification by it every endorser 
shall be obliged to bring to the notice of his endorser the received notification. During the same period of 
time the notification shall be sent to the one who has given the guarantee for this person. 
The person who has not sent a notification within the said period shall not lose his rights. He shall 
indemnify for the losses that can be caused by the non-notification about cheque non-payment. The 
amount of the indemnified losses may not exceed the cheque amount. 
Article 885. The Consequences of Cheque Non-Payment 
1. If the payer refuses to pay a cheque, the cheque holder shall have the right to bring an action to 
one, several or all the persons bound by the cheque (cheque drawer, guarantors and endorsers), who bear 
joint and several liability to him. 
2. The cheque drawer shall have the right to demand from said persons the payment of the cheque 
amount, his costs involved in the cashing of the cheque, and also interest in keeping with Item 1 of Article 
395 of this Code. 
The same right shall belong to the person bound by the cheque after it has paid the cheque. 
3. The cheque holder's claim against the persons, referred to in Item 1 of this Article, may be 
brought during six months since the day of the expiry of the period of presenting the cheque for payment. 
Claim resources of bound persons to each other shall be cancelled upon the expiry of six months since the 
day when the relevant bound person has satisfied the claim or since the day of bringing the action against 
him. 
Chapter 47. Storage 
_ 1. General Provisions on Storage 
Article 886. The Storage Agreement 
1. Under the storage agreement one party (depository) shall undertake to keep the thing given to it 
by the other party (depositor) and to return this thing perfectly safe. 
2. The storage agreement in which the depository is represented by a profit-making or an non-profit 
organization, which ensures storage as one of the goals of its professional activity (professional 
depository), may provide for the depository's obligation of accepting a thing for storage from the 
depositor within the period fixed by the agreement. 
Article 887. The Form of the Storage Agreement 
1. A storage agreement shall be concluded in writing in cases, indicated in Article 161 of this Code. 
For the storage agreement concluded between individuals (Subitem 2 of Item 1 of Article 161) the written 
form shall be observed, if the value of the thing put in storage exceeds the minimum amount of the wage 
or salary by at least ten months. 
The storage agreement, which provides for the depository's obligation of accepting a thing for 
storage, shall be concluded in writing, regardless of the number of the parties to this agreement and the 
value of the thing put in storage. 
The delivery of a thing for storage under extraordinary circumstances (a fire, natural disaster, 
sudden illness, threat of assault, etc.) may be proved by the witness's testimony. 
2. The single written form of the storage agreement shall be deemed to be observed, if the 
acceptance of a thing for storage is certified by the issue of the following documents by the depository to 
the depositor: 
the trust receipt, storage receipt, certificate or other document signed by the depository; 
the numbered counter (check) and other sign that certifies the acceptance of things for storage, if 
such form of acknowledgment of the acceptance of things for storage is provided for by the law or any 
other legal act, or is common for this type of storage. 
3. Non-observance of the simple written form of the storage agreement shall not deprive the parties 
of the right to refer to testimonies by witnesses in case of a dispute over the identify of the thing accepted 
for storage and the thing returned by the depositor. 
Article 888. The Execution of the Obligation to Accept a Thing for Storage 
1. The depository who has undertaken under the storage agreement the obligation of accepting a 
thing for storage (Item 2 of Article 886) shall have no right to demand the transfer of this thing for 
storage. 
However, the depositor who has failed to transfer a thing for storage within the period fixed by the 
agreement shall bear liability to the depository for the losses caused in connection with coming off 
storage, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the storage agreement. The depositor shall be released 
from this liability, if he states to the depository that he refuses to accept his services within a reasonable 
period of time. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the storage agreement, the depository shall be released from the 
obligation of accepting a thing for storage in case when the thing will not be given to him in the period of 
time specified by the agreement. 
Article 889. The Period of Storage 
1. The depository shall be obliged to keep a thing during the time-limit specified by the agreement. 
2. Unless the period of storage is provided for by the agreement and if it cannot be defined by 
proceeding from its terms and conditions, the depository shall be obliged to keep the thing until it is 
claimed by its depositor. 
3. If the period of storage is determined by the time of claiming a thing by the depositor, the 
depository shall have the right to demand that the depositor should take back the thing upon the expiry of 
the period of storage which is usual under given circumstances and to provide to him a reasonable period 
of time for this. The non-execution by the depositor of this obligation shall involve the consequences, 
envisaged by Article 899 of this Code. 
Article 890. The Storage of Things with Deprivation of Individuality 
In cases, expressly provided for by the storage agreement, the things of one depositor accepted for 
storage may be mixed with the things of the same kind and quality belonging to other depositors (storage 
with deprivation of individuality). The quantity of things of the same kind and quality shall be returned to 
the depositor in equal amounts as specified by the parties. 
Article 891. The Depository's Obligation to Ensure the Safety of a Thing 
1. The depository shall be obliged to take all the measures envisaged by the storage agreement in 
order to ensure the safety of the thing put in storage. 
In the absence in the agreement of the conditions for such measures or in case of incompleteness of 
these conditions the depository shall also be obliged to take for the preservation of the thing measures 
corresponding to the business turnover usages and the substance of the obligation, including the 
properties of the thing put in storage, unless the necessity for taking these measures is excluded by the 
agreement. 
2. The depository shall take measures in any case for the preservation of the thing given to him, if 
they are provided for by the law, other legal acts or in the manner stipulated by them (fire prevention, 
sanitary, protective and other measures). 
3. If storage is carried out gratuitously, the depository shall be obliged to take care of the thing 
accepted for storage to no less extent than of his own things. 
Article 892. Use of the Thing Put in Storage 
The depository shall have no right to make use of the thing put in storage without the consent of the 
depositor and likewise to give the opportunity for its use by third persons with the exception of the case 
when the use of the kept thing is necessary for its preservation and does not contradict the storage 
agreement. 
Article 893. Changes in the Conditions of Storage 
1. If it is necessary to change the conditions of the storage of a thing, envisaged by the storage 
agreement, the depository shall be obliged to notify the depositor about this without delay and to wait for 
his answer. 
If changes in the conditions of storage are essential for the removal of the danger of the loss, 
shortage of, or damage to, a thing, the depository shall have the right to change the method, place and 
other conditions of storage without waiting for the depositor's answer. 
2. If during storage there is a real threat of damage to a thing or the thing has already been damaged, 
or there are circumstances that do not make it possible to preserve it and if the depositor is unable to take 
measures in due time, the depository shall have the right to sell the thing on its own or its part thereof at 
the price that have formed in the place of storage. If said circumstances have arisen for the reasons for 
which the depository is not answerable, he shall have the right to recompense his costs of the sale at the 
expense of the purchase price. 
Article 894. The Storage of Things with Hazardous Properties 
1. Highly inflammable, explosion risky or generally dangerous things may be at any time rendered 
harmless or destroyed by the depository without compensation of the depositor's losses, unless the 
depositor failed to warn the depository about these properties when he put them in storage. The depositor 
shall be liable for the losses caused to the depository and third persons in connection with the storage of 
these things. 
When things with dangerous properties are transferred for storage to the professional depository, the 
rules envisaged by the first paragraph of this point shall be applied in case when such things were put in 
storage under the wrong name and the depository could not make sure of their dangerous properties by 
means of an external inspection. 
In the event of remunerated storage in cases, provided for by this Item, the paid remuneration for the 
storage of things shall not be returned, and if it has not been paid, the depository may recover it in full. 
2. If things accepted for storage with the knowledge and consent of the depository and indicated in 
the first paragraph of Item 1 of this Article, have become dangerous for people around or for the 
depositor's property or that of third persons, despite the observance of the conditions of their storage, and 
if circumstances make it possible for the depository to demand that the depositor should take them, at 
once or if he does not meet this demand, these things may be rendered harmless or destroyed by the 
depository without compensation of the depositor's losses. In such case the depositor shall bear no 
liability to the depository and third persons for the losses caused in view of the storage of these things. 
Article 895. The Transfer of a Thing to a Third Person 
Unless the storage agreement stipulates otherwise, the depository shall have no right to transfer a 
thing for storage to a third person without the consent of the depositor with the exception of cases where 
he is compelled to do so by force of circumstances in the interest of the depositor and is deprived of the 
possibility to get his consent. 
The depository shall be obliged to inform the depositor at once about the transfer of a thing for 
storage to a third person. 
In case of the transfer of a thing for storage to a third person the terms and conditions of the 
agreement between the depositor and the original depository shall retain their force and the latter shall be 
answerable for the actions of the third person to whom he has given the thing as for his own actions. 
Article 896. Remuneration for Storage 
1. Remuneration for storage shall be paid to the depository as soon as storage is over, and if 
payment for storage is envisaged by persons of time, it shall be paid out in appropriate portions upon the 
expiry of each period. 
2. In case of delay in the payment of remuneration for storage for over than half of the period, for 
which it should be paid, the depository shall have the right to refuse the execute the agreement and 
demand that the depositor should immediately take the thing put in storage. 
3. If storage is terminated before the expiry of the stipulated period of time due to the circumstances 
for which the depository is not answerable, he shall have the right to a proportionate part of remuneration 
and in case, specified by Item 1 of Article 894 of this Code, to the entire sum of this remuneration. 
If storage is terminated short of the term due to the circumstances for which the depository is 
answerable, he shall not have the right to demand remuneration for storage and shall be obliged to return 
the sum of money received on account of this remuneration to the depositor. 
4. If the thing held in custody has not been taken back by the depositor upon the expiry of the period 
of storage, he shall be obliged to pay to the depository adequate remuneration for the further storage of 
the thing. This rule shall also be applied in case where the depositor is obliged to take the thing before the 
expiry of the period of storage. 
5. The rules of this Article shall be applied, unless the storage agreement provides for otherwise. 
Article 897. The Reimbursement of Storage Expenses 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the storage agreement, the depository's expenses on the storage of 
a thing shall be included in remuneration for storage. 
2. In case of unremunerated storage the depositor shall be obliged to compensate for the depository's 
necessary expenses on the storage of the thing, unless the law or the storage agreement provides 
otherwise. 
Article 898. Extraordinary Storage Expenses 
1. Expenses on the storage of things which exceed the usual expenses of this kind and which could 
not be foreseen by the parties during the conclusion of a storage agreement (extraordinary expenses) shall 
be reimbursed to the depository, if the depositor has given his consent to these expenses or has approved 
them afterwards, and also in other cases stipulated by the law, other legal acts or the storage agreement. 
2. If there is a need for making extraordinary expenses, the depository shall be obliged to inquire 
about the depositor's consent to these expenses. If the depositor fails to state his disagreement within the 
period of time, indicated by the depository or during the normally essential time for reply, it shall be held 
that he agrees with the extraordinary expenses. 
When the depository made extraordinary storage expenses without the preliminary consent of the 
depositor, although this was possible thanks to the circumstances of the case and the depositor failed to 
approve them afterwards, the depository may demand the compensation for the extraordinary expenses 
only within the limits of the damage which could be caused to the thing, had not these expenses been 
made. 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the storage agreement, extraordinary expenses shall be reimbursed 
over and above remuneration for storage. 
Article 899. The Depositor's Obligation to Take a Thing Back 
1. Upon the expiry of the stipulated period of storage or the period granted by the depository for the 
receipt of a thing back on the strength of Item 3 of Article 889 of this Code, the depositor shall be obliged 
to take the thing put in storage without delay. 
2. In case of default on his obligation by the depositor to take back the thing transferred for storage, 
including in case of his evasion from obtaining the thing, the depository shall have the right, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the storage agreement, after the written warning of the depositor to sell the thing 
on his own at the price formed in the place of storage, and if the cost of the thing exceeds 100 statutory 
minimum amounts of wages or salaries, to sell the thing at an auction in the order, prescribed by Articles 
447-449 of this Code. 
The sum of money received from the sale of the thing shall be transferred to the depositor minus the 
amount due to the depository, including his expenses on the sale of the thing. 
Article 900. The Depository's Obligation to Return a Thing 
1. The depository shall be obliged to return to the depositor or the person, indicated by him as a 
recipient, the very thing which was put in storage, unless the agreement provides for storage with 
deprivation of individuality (Article 890). 
2. The thing shall be returned by the depository in the condition in which it was accepted for storage 
with due account of its natural deterioration, natural properties. 
3. The depository shall be obliged, simultaneously with the return of a thing, to transfer the fruits 
and incomes obtained during its storage, unless otherwise stipulated by the storage agreement. 
Article 901. Grounds for the Depository's Liability 
1. The depository shall be liable for the loss and shortage of, or damage to, things accepted for 
storage on the grounds, provided for by Article 401 of this Code. 
A professional depository shall be liable for the loss and shortage of, or damage to, things, unless he 
proves that the loss, shortage or damage have taken place due to force majeure or to the properties of the 
thing about which the depository did not know and should nor know when he accepted it for storage or as 
a result of malice or gross negligence on the part of the depositor. 
2. The depository shall be liable for the loss and shortage of, damage to, the things accepted for 
storage only in the presence of the depositor's malice or gross negligence after the onset of the latter's 
obligation to take these things back (Item 1 of Article 899). 
Article 902. The Extent of the Depository's Liability 
1. Losses caused to the depositor by the loss and shortage of, or damage to, things shall be 
reimbursed by the depository in keeping with Article 393 of this Code, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
law or the storage agreement. 
2. In case of remunerated storage the losses caused to the depositor by the loss and shortage of, or 
damage to, things shall be reimbursed as follows: 
1) for the loss and shortage of things - in the amount of the value of the lost or missing things; 
2) for the damage to things - in the amount of the sum of money by which their value has been 
reduced. 
3. In case where as a result of damage, for which the depository is liable, the quality of the thing has 
changed so much that it cannot be used according to the original designation, the depositor shall have the 
right to waive it and demand that the depository should replace the value of this thing, and also should 
reimburse other losses, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the storage agreement. 
Article 903. The Reparation of Losses Caused to the Depository 
The depositor shall be obliged to compensate for the depository's losses caused by the properties of 
the thing put in storage, if the depository did not know or should not know about these properties when he 
accepted the thing for storage. 
Article 904. The Termination of Storage on the Depositor's Demand 
The depository shall be obliged to return the thing accepted for storage on the depositor's demand, 
although the period of storage fixed by the agreement is not over as yet. 
Article 905. The Application of the General Provisions on Storage to Some of 
Its Kinds 
The general provisions on storage (Articles 886-904) shall be applicable to some of its kinds, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the rules for particular kinds of storage, contained in Articles 907-926 of this 
Code and in other laws. 
Article 906. Storage in Virtue of Law 
The rules of this Chapter shall be applicable to the obligations of storage that arise by dint of law, 
unless the law establishes different rules. 
_ 2. Warehousing 
Article 907. Warehouse Storage Agreement 
1. Under the warehouse storage agreement the commodity warehouse (depository) shall undertake 
to keep in store for remuneration goods given to it by the commodity owner (depositor) and to return 
these goods perfectly safe. 
A commodity warehouse shall be deemed to be the organization which keeps goods in store as 
business and which renders services relating to storage. 
2. The written form of the warehouse storage agreement shall be deemed to be observed, if its 
conclusion and acceptance of goods for warehouse have been certified by the warehouse document 
(Article 912). 
Article 908. Storage of Goods at the Public Warehouse 
Federal Law No. 15-FZ of January 10, 2003 amended Item 1 of Article 908 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
1. A commodity warehouse shall be recognized as a public warehouse, if it follows from the law, 
other legal acts that is a duty-bound to accept goods for storage from any commodity owner. 
2. A warehouse storage agreement, concluded by the public warehouse shall be recognized as a 
public agreement (Article 426). 
Article 909. Inspection of Goods When the Commodity Warehouse Accepts 
Them and During Their Storage 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the warehouse storage agreement, the commodity warehouse shall 
be obliged, when it accepts goods for storage, to inspect them as its own expense and to estimate their 
quantity (number of units or places of storage, or measure: weight or volume) and their external 
appearance. 
2. The commodity warehouse shall be obliged to enable the commodity owner to inspect goods or 
heir sapless during storage, if storage is carried our with deprivation of individuality, to take on trial and 
adopt measures necessary for the safety of goods. 
Article 910. Changes in the Conditions of Storage and the State of Goods 
1. In case where it is necessary to change the conditions of storage of goods in order to keep them 
safe, the commodity warehouse shall have the right to take the required measures on its own. However, it 
shall be obliged to notify the commodity owner about the adopted measures, if it was necessary to make 
essential changes in the conditions of storage of goods, envisaged by the warehouse storage agreement. 
2. Upon the discovery, during storage, of damage inflicted on goods and transcending the usual 
norms of natural spoiling or such norms agreed upon in the warehouse storage agreement, the commodity 
warehouse shall be obliged to draw up a report about this without delay and on the same day inform the 
commodity owner about this. 
Article 911. The Checking of the Quantity and the State of Goods When They 
Are Returned to the Commodity Owner 
1. The commodity owner and the commodity warehouse shall each have the right to demand that 
they should be inspected and their quantity checked during their return. Expenses incurred by this shall be 
borne by the person who demanded the inspection of goods and their quantity check. 
2. If during the return of goods to the commodity owner by the warehouse goods have not been 
inspected and checked by them jointly, a written application on the shortage of, or damage to, goods 
owning to their improper storage shall be failed with the warehouse upon the receipt of goods. As for 
shortage of goods or damage to them, which could not be detected with the usual method of accepting 
goods an application shall be failed during three days after their acceptance. 
In the absence of the application, referred to in the first paragraph of this Item, it shall be held, 
unless the contrary is proved, that goods have been returned by the warehouse in keeping with the terms 
and conditions of the warehouse storage agreement. 
Article 912. Warehouse Documents 
1. The commodity warehouse shall issue one of the following warehouse documents in the 
acknowledgement of accepting goods for storage: 
the twofold warehouse certificate; 
the single warehouse certificate; 
the warehouse receipt. 
2. The twofold warehouse certificate consists of two parts - the warehouse certificate and the 
mortgage certificate (warrant), which can be separated from each other. 
3. The twofold warehouse certificate, each of its two parts and the single warehouse certificate shall 
be securities. 
4. Goods accepted for storage under the twofold or single warehouse certificate may be a subject of 
mortgage during their storage by means of pledge of the corresponding certificate. 
Article 913. The Twofold Warehouse Certificate 
1. Each part of the twofold warehouse certificate shall equally indicate: 
1) the name and place of location of the commodity warehouse that has accepted goods for storage; 
2) the current number of the warehouse certificate in the warehouse's register; 
3) the name of the legal entity or the name of the individual from whom goods have been accepted 
for storage, and also the place of location (place of residence) of the commodity owner; 
4) the name and quantity of goods accepted for storage - the number of units and/or commodity 
places and/or the measure of goods (weight or volume); 
5) the period of time for which goods have been accepted for storage, if such period is fixed, or the 
reference to the effect that goods have been accepted for storage until to be called for; 
6) the amount of remuneration for storage or the rates on the basis of which it is reckoned and the 
procedure for payment for storage; 
7) the date of the issue of the warehouse certificate. 
Both parts of the twofold warehouse certificate shall have the individual signatures of the authorized 
representative and the warehouse seal. 
2. The document which does not comply with the requirements of this Article shall not be a twofold 
warehouse certificate. 
Article 914. The Rights of the Holders of the Warehouse and Mortgage 
Certificates 
1. The holder of the warehouse and mortgage certificates shall have the right to dispose of goods 
kept in a warehouse in full measure. 
2. The holder of the warehouse certificate separated from the mortgage certificate shall have the 
right to dispose of goods, but may not take them from the warehouse until he repays the credit granted 
under the mortgage certificate. 
3. The holder of the mortgage certificate who differs from the holder of the warehouse certificate 
shall have the right to pledge to goods in the amount of the credit given under the mortgage certificate and 
interest on it. When goods are put in pledge, a note on this shall be made in the warehouse certificate. 
Article 915. The Transfer of Warehouse and Mortgage Certificates 
A warehouse certificate and a mortgage certificate may be transferred together or separately 
according to endorsements. 
Article 916. The Issue of Goods under the Two-fold Warehouse Certificate 
1. The commodity warehouse shall issue goods to the holder of the warehouse and mortgage 
certificates (twofold warehouse certificate) precisely in exchange for both these certificates together. 
2. The holder of a warehouse certificate who does not possess a mortgage certificate, but has 
contributed the entire sum of debt under it shall receive goods from the warehouse precisely in exchange 
for the warehouse certificate and provided that he has submitted together with it the receipt of the 
payment of the entire sum of debt under the mortgage certificate. 
3. The commodity warehouse, which has issued goods to the holder of a warehouse certificate who 
does not possess a mortgage certificate and has failed to bring in the amount of debt under it contrary to 
the requirements of this Article, shall bear liability to the holder of the mortgage certificate for payment 
of the entire sum of money secured by it. 
4. The holder of the warehouse and mortgage certificates shall have the right to demand the issue of 
goods in parts. In exchange for the original certificates he shall be given new certificates for goods that 
remained in the warehouse. 
Article 917. The Simple Warehouse Certificate 
1. A simple warehouse certificate shall be issued to the bearer. 
2. The simple warehouse certificate shall contain information, specified by Subitems 1, 2, 4-7 of 
Item 1 and the last paragraph of Article 913 of this Code, and also reference to the fact that it has been 
issued to the bearer. 
3. The document which does not comply with the requirements of this Article shall not be a simple 
warehouse certificate. 
Article 918. The Storage of Things with the Right to Dispose of Them 
If it follows from the law, other legal acts or the agreement that the commodity warehouse can 
dispose of goods put in storage, the relations between the parties shall be governed by the rules of Chapter 
42 of this Code on Loans, but the time and place of the return of goods shall be determined by the rules of 
this Chapter. 
_ 3. Special Kinds of Storage 
Article 919. Storage in a Pawnshop 
1. The agreement of pawnshop storage of things belonging to an individual shall be a public 
agreement (Article 426). 
2. The conclusion of a pawnshop storage agreement shall be certified by the issue by the pawnshop 
to the depositor of a registered deposit receipt. 
3. A thing to be put in storage in a pawnshop shall be subject to valuation under the agreement of 
the parties in accordance with prices for things of this kind and quality, usually adopted in trade at the 
time and place of their acceptance for storage. 
4. The pawnshop shall be obliged to insure the things accepted for storage in favour of the depositor 
at its expense in the full amount of the valuation made in keeping with Item 3 of this Article. 
Article 920. Things Not Reclaimed from the Pawnshop 
1. If a thing out in storage in a pawnshop has not been reclaimed by the depositor within the time 
specified by the agreement, the pawnshop shall be obliged to keep it during two months and to charge 
payment, provided for by the storage agreement. Upon the expiry of this time the non-reclaimed thing 
may be sold by the pawnshop in the procedure, established by Item 5 of Article 358 of this Code. 
2. Payment for the storage of the non-reclaimed thing and other payments due to the pawnshop shall 
be repayed from the sum of money, received from the sale of this thing. The remainder of the sum shall 
be returned by the pawnshop to the depositor in question. 
Article 921. The Custody of Valuables in a Bank 
1. The bank may receive securities, precious metals and stones, other valuables and values, 
including documents, into its custody. 
2. The conclusion of an agreement on the custody of valuables in a bank shall be certified by the 
issue by it to the depositor of a registered protection document whose presentation is a ground for the 
issue of kept valuables to the depositor. 
Article 922. The Custody of Valuables in the Individual Bank Safe-deposit Box 
1. The valuables bank custody agreement may provide for their custody with the use of an 
individual bank safe-deposit box (safe cell or isolated bank premise) by the depositor (client) or with the 
provision of such safe-deposit box protected by the bank. 
Under the valuables bank custody agreement the client shall be provided with the right to put 
valuables in an individual bank safe-deposit box and withdraw them from it. For this purpose he shall be 
given a key to the safe and the card that makes it possible to identify the client or any other sign or 
document certifying the client's right to have access to the safe and its contents. 
The agreement terms may provide for the client's right to work in the bank with valuables kept in 
the individual safe. 
2. Under the valuables bank custody agreement with the use by the client of an individual date
deposit box the bank shall accept from the client the valuables which should be kept in the safe and 
exercise control over their placement by the client in the safe-deposit box, over their withdrawal from the 
safe and return them to the client after the withdrawal. 
3. Under the valuables bank custody agreement with the provision of the client with an individual 
safe-deposit box the bank shall enable the client to place valuables in the safe and to withdraw them from 
the safe outside anybody's control, including bank control. 
The bank shall be obliged to exercise control over the access to the premise where the safe-deposit 
box given to the client is situated. 
Unless the valuables bank custody agreement with the provision of the client with an individual 
safe-deposit box provides for otherwise, the bank shall be released from the liability for the non-safety of 
the safe's contents, if it proves that access by anybody to the safe was impossible under the custody terms 
without the knowledge of the client or was possible due to force majeure. 
4. The rules of this Code on the lease agreement shall be applicable to the agreement on the 
provision of another person with a bank safe-deposit box for his use without the bank's liability for the 
safe's contents. 
Article 923. Storage in Cloak-Rooms of Transport Organizations 
1. The cloak-rooms under the authority of transport organizations of public use shall be obliged to 
accept for storage the things of passengers and other private persons, regardless of the possession of travel 
documents. The agreement on the storage of things in the cloak-rooms of transport organizations shall be 
recognized as a public agreement (Article 426). 
2. A receipt or numbered counter shall be issued to the depositor in acknowledgement of the 
acceptance of a thing for storage in a cloak-room (except for automated cloak-rooms). In case of the loss 
of a receipt or counter, the thing left in the cloak-room shall be issued to the depositor upon the 
submission of evidence that this thing belongs to him. 
3. The period of time during which the cloak-room is obliged to keep things in store shall be 
determined by the rules, introduced in keeping with the second paragraph of Item 2 of Article 784 of this 
Code, unless the agreement between the parties stipulates a longer period. Things which have not been 
reclaimed in said period of time shall be kept by the cloak-room for 30 days more. With the expiry of this 
period non-reclaimed things may be sold in the procedure, envisaged by Item 2 of Article 899 of this 
Code. 
4. The losses of the depositor owing to the loss and shortage of, or damage to, the things deposited 
in a cloak-room shall be reimbursed by the custodian during 24 hours since the time of presenting a claim 
for these things within the sum of their appraisal by the depositor at the time of depositing. 
Article 924. Storage in the Wardrobes of Organizations 
1. The storage of things in the wardrobes of organizations shall be gratuitous, unless money reward 
is specified or stipulated in any other way when things were put in storage. 
The custodian of the thing left in a wardrobe shall be obliged to take all the measures, provided for 
by Items 1 and 2 of Article 891 of this Code, in order to preserve the thing, regardless of the fact whether 
its storage was gratuitous or remunerated. 
2. The rules of this Article shall also be applied to the custody of outwear, head gear and other 
similar things left without putting them in storage by private persons in places used for these purposes in 
transport organizations and facilities. 
Article 925. The Custody of Things in Hotels 
1. The hotel shall also be liable as a custodian without the conclusion of a relevant agreement with 
its guest residing in it for the loss and shortage of, or damage to, his things brought into the hotel with the 
except of money, other currency values, securities and other valuables. 
The thing entrusted to hotel attendants or the thing deposited in a hotel room or in any other 
specially assigned place shall be regarded as the one brought into the hotel. 
2. The hotel shall be liable for the loss of money, other currency values, securities and other 
valuables of a guest, provided they have been accepted by the hotel safe, regardless of the fact whether 
this safe is to be found in his room or in another hotel premise. The hotel shall be released from liability 
for the non-safety of the safe's contents, if it proves that under the storage terms the access of any body to 
the safe was impossible without the guest's knowledge or became possible owing to force majeure. 
3. The guest who has discovered that his things were lost or damaged shall be obliged to state about 
this to the hotel management without delay. Otherwise the hotel shall be released from its liability for the 
non-safety of things. 
4. The hotel's notice to the effect that it does not assume the responsibility for the non-safety of 
things belonging to guests shall not absolve it from liability. 
5. The rules of this Article shall be applied accordingly to the custody of things belonging to private 
persons in motels, holiday homes, holiday hotels, sanatoria, public baths and other similar organizations. 
Article 926. The Custody of Things Which Are the Subject of Disputes 
(Sequestration) 
1. Under the agreement on sequestration two or several persons who have started an argument over 
the right to a thing shall pass this thing to the third person who assumes the obligation of returning, upon 
the settlement of the dispute, of the thing to that person to whom it will be adjudged or given under the 
agreement of all the persons in dispute (contractual sequestration). 
2. A thing that is the subject of argument between two or several persons may be put in storage by 
way of sequestration by a court decision (judicial sequestration). 
Both the person appointed by a court of law and the person, chosen by the mutual agreement of the 
persons in dispute, may act as a custodian under the judicial sequestration. The custodian's consent shall 
be required in both cases, unless the law establishes otherwise. 
3. Both movable and immovable things may be put in storage by way of sequestration. 
4. The custodian who keeps a thing in store by way of sequestration shall have the right to receive 
remuneration at the expense of the persons in dispute, unless the agreement or the court decision 
responsible for sequestration provides for otherwise. 
Chapter 48. Insurance 
See Review of the Case-Law Connected with Execution of Insurance Contracts given by Informational 
Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 75 of November 
28, 2003  
Article 927. Voluntary and Obligatory Insurance 
1. Insurance shall be effected on the basis of contracts of property or personal insurance, concluded 
by the individual or legal entity (insurant) with the insurance company (insurer). 
The contract of personal insurance is a public agreement (Article 426). 
2. In cases where the law entrusts the obligation of insurance cover to the persons referred to in it of 
the lives, health or property of other persons or of their civil liability to other persons at their expense or 
at the expense of interested persons (obligatory insurance), insurance shall be effected by concluding 
contracts in keeping with the rules of this Chapter. For the insurers the conclusion of contracts of 
insurance shall not be obligatory on the terms offered by the insurant. 
See Federal Law No. 40-FZ of April 25, 2002 on Compulsory Insurance of Civil Liability of Transport 
Vehicles' Owners  
3. The law may provide for cases of obligatory insurance of the lives, health and property of 
individuals at the expense of the resources allocated from the appropriate budget (obligatory state 
insurance). 
See the Law of the Russian Federation No. 4015-1 on Insurance 
Article 928. Interests Whose Insurance Is Not Allowed 
1. No insurance of interests contrary to law shall be allowed. 
2. No insurance of losses from the participation in games, lotteries and bets shall be allowed. 
3. No insurance of expenditure to which a person can be compelled for the purpose of setting 
hostages free shall be allowed. 
4. The terms and conditions of the contracts of insurance which contradict Items 1-3 of this Article 
shall be null and void. 
Article 929. The Contract of Property Insurance 
1. Under the contract of property insurance one part (insurer) shall undertake, for the charge 
stipulated by the contract (insurance premium) and upon the onset of an event (insured accident), 
stipulated by the contract, to reimburse to the other party (insurant) or another person in favour of whom 
the contract has been concluded (beneficiary) the losses inflicted in consequence of this event in the 
insured property or the losses sustained in connection with other property interests of the insurant (to pay 
insurance compensation) within the amount specified by the contract (insured sum). 
2. The following property interests may be insured in particular under the contract of property 
insurance: 
1) the risk of loss (destruction), shortage of, or damage to, property (Article 930); 
2) the liability risk under the obligations arising due to the infliction of harm on the lives, health or 
property of other persons, and also the civil liability risk (Articles 931 and 932), or liability under 
contracts in cases, provided for by the law; 
3) the risk of losses from business activity because of the violation of their obligations by the 
contracting parties of the businessman or the change in the conditions of this activity due to the 
circumstances beyond the businessman's control, including the risk of non-receipt of expected incomes - 
the entrepreneur's risk (Article 933). 
Article 930. Insurance of Property 
1. Property may be insured under the contract of insurance in favour of the person (insurant or 
beneficiary) who has the interest in the preservation of the property, based on the law, other legal act or 
the contract. 
2. The contract of insurance of property, concluded in the absence of the insurant's or the 
beneficiary's interest in the preservation of insured property, shall be void. 
3. A contract of insurance of property in favour of a beneficiary may be concluded without reference 
to the name of the beneficiary (insurance at the expense of the one who pays). 
Upon the conclusion of such contract the insurant shall be given an insurance policy to bearer. 
When the insurant or the beneficiary exercises the rights under such contract this policy shall be given to 
the insurer. 
Article 931. Insurance of Liability for the Infliction of Harm 
1. Under the contract of insurance of liability risk under the obligations following in consequence of 
the infliction of harm on the lives, health or property of other persons, the liability risk of the insurant 
himself or any other person who bears such liability may be insured. 
2. A person whose risk of liability for the infliction of harm has been insured shall be named in the 
insurance contract. If this person is not named in the contract, the liability risk of the insurant himself 
shall be deemed to be insured. 
3. A contract of insurance of the risk of liability for the infliction of harm shall be deemed to be 
concluded, even of the contract has been concluded in favour of the insurant or any other person liable for 
the infliction of harm or the contract fails to state in whose favour it has been concluded. 
4. In case where the liability for the infliction of harm is insured because its insurance is 
compulsory, and also in other cases, stipulated by the law or the contract of insurance of such liability, the 
person in favour of whom the insurance contract is deemed to be concluded shall have the right to present 
directly to the insurer his claim on the reparation of harm within the insured amount. 
Article 932. Insurance of Liability under the Contract 
1. Insurance of the risk of liability for the contravention of the contract shall be allowed in cases, 
provided for by the law. 
2. Under the contract of insurance of the risk of liability for the contravention of the contract only 
the liability risk of the insurant himself may be insured. The insurance contract that does not comply with 
such requirements shall be void. 
3. This risk of liability for the violation of the contract shall be deemed to be insured in favour of the 
party to whom the insurant should bear liability under the terms and conditions of this contract, that is the 
beneficiary, even if the insurance contract has been concluded in favour of another person or if the 
contract does not say in whose favour it is concluded. 
Article 933. Insurance of Entrepreneurial Risk 
Under the contract of insurance of entrepreneurial risk only the entrepreneurial risk of th insurant 
himself may be insured and only in his favour. 
The contract of insurance of the entrepreneurial risk of the person who is not an insurant shall be 
void. 
The contract of insurance of entrepreneurial risk is favour of the person who is not an insurant shall 
be concluded in favour of the insurant. 
Article 934. The Contract of Personal Insurance 
1. Under the contract of personal insurance one party (insurer) shall undertake to pay for the charge, 
stipulated by the contract (insurance premium) and paid by the other party (insurant), in the lump or 
periodically the sum of money, specified by the contract (insured amount) in case of the infliction of harm 
on the life or health of the insurant himself or any other individual named in the contract (insured person), 
of the attainment of a certain age or the onset of another event, provided for by the contract (insured 
accident). 
The right to receive the insured amount shall belong to the person in favour of whom the contract 
has been concluded. 
2. A contract of personal insurance shall be deemed to be concluded in favour of the insured person, 
if the contract fails to name another person as a beneficiary. In the event of death of the person insured 
under the contract, in which a different beneficiary is not named, the heirs of the insured person shall be 
recognized as beneficiaries. 
A contract of personal insurance in favour of the person who is not insured, including in favour of 
the insurant who is not an insured person, may be concluded only with the written consent of the insured 
person. In the absence of such consent a contract may be recognized as invalid upon the lawsuit of the 
insured person and in the event of death of this person - upon the lawsuit brought by his heirs. 
Article 935. Obligatory Insurance 
1. The law may entrust the obligation of insurance to the persons referred to in it: 
the lives, health and property of other persons, defined in the law, in case of the infliction of harm to 
their lives, health and property; 
See Federal Law No. 177-FZ of December 23, 2003 on Insuring Natural Persons' Deposits Made with 
Banks of the Russian Federation  
See Federal Law No. 165-FZ of July 16, 1999 on the Fundamentals of Compulsory Social Insurance  
the risk of their civil liability which can competence in consequence of the infliction of harm on the 
lives, health or property of other persons or the contravention of contracts concluded with other persons. 
See Federal Law No. 40-FZ of April 25, 2002 on Compulsory Insurance of Civil Liability of Transport 
Vehicles' Owners  
2. The obligation of insuring his life and health may not be entrusted to the individual under the law. 
3. In cases stipulated by the law or established in the statutory procedure the legal entities, which 
possess state or municipal property in their economic or operative management, may be entrusted with 
the obligation of insuring this property. 
4. In case where the obligation of insurance does not follow from the law is based on the contract, 
including the obligation of insuring property, on the contract with the owner of property or on the 
constituent documents of the legal entity which owns property, such insurance shall not be obligatory in 
the meaning of this Article and shall not entail the consequences, provided for by Article 937 of this 
Code. 
Article 936. The Conduct of Obligatory Insurance 
1. Obligatory insurance shall be effected by means of concluding an insurance contract with the 
person charged with the obligation of such insurance (the insurant) and the insurer. 
2. Obligatory insurance shall be effected at the expense of the insurant with the exception of 
obligatory insurance of passengers, which in statutory cases may be effected at their expense. 
3. Facilities subject to obligatory insurance, the risks against which they should be insured and the 
minimum amounts of insured sums shall be determined by the law and in the case, specified by Item 3 of 
Article 935 of this Code, by the law or in the statutory procedure. 
Article 937. The Consequences of the Violation of the Rules for Obligatory 
Insurance 
1. The person in favour of whom obligatory insurance should be effected shall have the right, if he 
knows that insurance is not effected, to demand in due course of law its implementation by the person 
charged with the obligation of insurance. 
2. If the person who is entrusted with the obligation of insurance has not effected it or has concluded 
an insurance contract on the terms deteriorating the position of the beneficiary as compared with the 
terms defined by the law, he shall bear liability to the beneficiary with the onset of an insured accident on 
the same terms on which the insured compensation should have been paid in case of proper insurance. 
3. The sums of money saved groundlessly by the person charged with the obligation of insurance 
due to the fact that he has not fulfilled this obligation or has fulfilled it improperly, shall be recovered on 
the claim lodged by bodies of state insurance supervision for the benefit of the Russian Federation with 
the addition of interest to these sums of money in keeping with Article 395 of this Code. 
Article 938. The Insurer 
Legal entities with a permit (license) appropriate insurance may conclude insurance contracts as 
insurers. 
The requirements made to insurance companies and the procedure for licensing their activity and 
exercising state supervision over this activity shall be determined by the laws on insurance. 
Article 939. The Performance of he Obligations under the Insurance Contract by 
the Insurant and the Beneficiary 
1. The conclusion of an insurance contract in favour of the beneficiary, especially at a time when the 
insured person is the beneficiary shall not absolve the insurant from the obligations under this contract, 
unless the latter provides for otherwise or if the insurant's obligations have been fulfilled by the person, in 
favour of whom the contract was concluded. 
2. The insurer shall have the right to demand from the beneficiary, especially at a time when the 
beneficiary is represented by the insured person, that the latter should perform the obligations under the 
insurance contract, including the obligations entrusted to the insurant but not fulfilled by him, upon the 
presentation by the beneficiary of the claim for the payment of insurance compensation under the contract 
of property insurance or of the insured amount under the contract of personal insurance. The risk of the 
consequences of non-fulfilment or untimely fulfilment of the obligations, which should have been 
fulfilled earlier, shall be borne by the beneficiary. 
Article 940. The Form of the Insurance Contract 
1. An insurance contract may be concluded in writing. Non-observance of the written form shall 
invalidate an insurance contract, exception being made for the contract of obligatory state insurance 
(Article 969). 
2. An insurance contract may be concluded by means of drawing up one document (Item 2 of 
Article 434) or handing over by the insurer to the insurant on the basis of his written or oral statement an 
customer policy (certificate or receipt) signed by the insurer. 
In the latter case the insurant's consent to conclude a contract on the terms proposed by the insurer 
shall be confirmed by the acceptance from the insurer of the documents, referred to in the first paragraph 
of this Item. 
3. At the time of concluding an insurance contract the insurer shall have the right to apply the 
standard forms of the contract (insurance policy), elaborated by him or the association of insurers for 
particular types of insurance. 
Article 941. Insurance Under the General Policy 
1. Systematic insurance of different lots of similar property (goods, cargoes, etc.) on acceptable 
terms during a definite period of time may be effected by agreement between the insurant and the insurer 
on the basis of one insurance contract, that is, general policy. 
2. The insurant shall be obliged to provide the insurer with information specified by such policy in 
respect of each lot of property subject to the operation of the general policy within the period of time, 
envisaged by it, and if this period is not provided for by it, at once upon their receipt. The insurant shall 
not be released from this duty, even if by the time of the receipt of such information, the possibility of 
losses liable to compensation by the insurer has already passed. 
3. On the demand of the insurant the insurer shall be obliged to issue insurance policies for 
particular lots of property liable to the operation of the general policy. 
In the event of inconsistency of the insurance policy with the general policy in terms of content, 
preference shall be given to insurance policy. 
Article 942. The Essential Terms and Conditions of the Insurance Contract 
1. During the conclusion of a contract of property insurance the insurant and the insurer shall reach 
agreement on: 
1) definite property or any other property interest as the object of insurance; 
2) the character of the event that entails insurance (insured accident); 
3) the amount of the insurance sum; 
4) the validity terms of the contract. 
2. During the conclusion of a contract of personal insurance the insurant and the insurer shall reach 
understanding on: 
1) the insured person; 
2) the character of the event (insured accident) that entails insurance in the life of the insured 
person; 
3) the amount of the insurance sum; 
4) the validity term of the contract. 
Article 943. The Definition of the Terms and Conditions of the Insurance 
Contract in the Insurance Rules 
1. The terms and conditions on which an insurance contract is concluded may be defined in the 
standard insurance rules, adopted, approved or endorsed by the insurer or by the association of insurers 
(insurance rules). 
2. The conditions contained in the insurance rules and not included in the text of the insurance 
contract (insurance policy) shall be compulsory for the insurant (beneficiary), if the contract (insurance 
policy) expressly indicated the application of such rules and the rules are set forth in one document with 
the contract (insurance policy) or on its reverse side or are appended to it. In the latter case the delivery of 
the insurance rules to the insurant during the conclusion of a contract shall be certified with an entry in 
the contract. 
3. During the conclusion of an insurance contract the insurant and the insurer may come to terms on 
the modification or exclusion of some provisions in the insurance rules and on the supplementing of the 
rules. 
4. The insurant (beneficial) shall have the right to refer in defence of its interests to the insurance 
rules to which there is a reference in the insurance contract (insurance policy), even if there rules are not 
compulsory for it by virtue of this Article. 
Article 944. Information Given by the Insurant During the Conclusion of an 
Insurance Contract 
1. During the conclusion of an insurance contract the insurant shall be obliged to communicate to 
the insurant the circumstances known to him and of relevance for the definition of the possible onset of an 
insured accident and the extent of possible losses from its commencement (insurance risk), if these 
circumstances are not known and should not be known to the insurer. 
The circumstances definitely specified by the insurer in the standard form of the insurance contract 
(insurance policy) or in its written inquiry shall be recognized as essential in any case. 
2. If an insurance contract has been concluded in the absence of the insurant's replies to any 
questions put by the insurer, the latter may not demand afterwards the dissolution of the contract or its 
recognition as invalid on the ground that relevant circumstances have not been communicated by the 
insurant. 
3. If it is ascertained after the conclusion of an insurance contract that the insurant has given to the 
insurer information known to be false about the circumstances, referred to in Item 1 of this Article, the 
insurer has the right to demand that the contract should be recognized as invalid and that the 
consequences, stipulated by Item 2 of Article 179 of this Code should be applied. 
The insurer may not demand the recognition of the insurance contract as invalid, if the 
circumstances about which the insurant has concealed have already disappeared. 
Article 945. The Insurer's Right to the Appraisal of Insurance Risk 
1. During the conclusion of a property insurance contract the insurer shall have the right to inspect 
the insurable property and in case of need to schedule an expert examination in order to estimate its actual 
value. 
2. During the conclusion of a personal insurance contract the insurer shall have the right to examine 
the insurable person for the appraisal of the actual state of his health. 
3. The appraisal of insurance risk by the insurer shall not be compulsory on the strength of this 
Article for the insurant, who has the right to prove something different. 
Article 946. Secrecy of Insurance 
The insurer shall have no right to disclose information about the insurant, the insured person and the 
beneficiary, the state of their health and about their property status, which he obtained as a result of his 
professional activity. For the divulgence of secrecy of insurance the insurer shall bear liability depending 
on the kind of the infringed rights and the nature of divulgence in accordance with the rules, envisaged by 
Article 139 or Article 150 of this Code. 
Article 947. The Insurance Sum 
1. The sum of money, within the limits of which the insurer undertakes to pay out insurance 
compensation under the property insurance contract or which he undertakes to pay out under the personal 
insurance contract (insurance sum) shall be determined by the agreement between the insurant and the 
insurer in keeping with the rules, provided for by this Article. 
2. In case of insurance of property or entrepreneurial risk, unless the insurance contract stipulates 
otherwise, the insurance sum shall not exceed their actual value (insurance sum). It shall be held as such 
value: 
for property its actual value in the place of its location on the day of concluding an insurance 
contract; 
for entrepreneurial risk the losses from business activity, which the insurant, as is to be expected, 
would sustain with the onset of an insured accident. 
3. In contracts of personal insurance and contracts of civil liability insurance the insurance sum shall 
be determined by the parties at their discretion. 
Article 948. The Contestation of the Insured Value of Assets 
The insured value of assets, referred to in the insurance contract, may not be contested afterwards, 
except for the case when the insurer, who before the conclusion of the contract has not availed himself of 
his right to the appraisal of insurance risk (Item 1 of Article 945) was deliberately misled with regard to 
this value. 
Article 949. Incomplete Property Insurance 
If the contract of property insurance or entrepreneurial risk has fixed the insurance sum below the 
insured value, the insurer shall be obliged on the onset of an insured accident to compensate for the part 
of the losses sustained by the insurant (beneficiary) in proportion to the ratio between the insurance sum 
and the insured value. 
The contract may provide for a higher amount of insurance compensation but not higher than the 
insured value. 
Article 950. Additional Property Insurance 
1. In case where property or entrepreneurial risk is insured only in terms of the part of insured value, 
the insurant (beneficiary) shall have the right to effect additional insurance, including with another 
insurer, with the proviso that total insurance sum should not exceed the insured value in all insurance 
contracts. 
2. The non-observance of the provisions of Item 1 of this Article shall entail the consequences, 
envisaged by Item 4 of Article 951 of this Code. 
Article 951. The Consequences of Insurance Over and Above the Insured Value 
1. If the insurance sum, referred to in the contract of property insurance or entrepreneurial risk, 
exceeds the insured value, the contract shall be void in that part of the sum which exceeds the insured 
value. 
The excessively paid part of the insurance premium shall not be subject to return in this case. 
2. If in accordance with the insurance contract the insurance premium is contributed by instalments 
and by the time of ascertaining the circumstances, referred to in Item 1 of this Article, it has not been 
contributed in full, the remaining insurance contributions shall be paid in the amount reduced in 
proportion to the decrease in the amount of the insurance sum. 
3. If the overestimation of the insurance sum in an insurance contract has been the consequence of 
deceit on the part of the insurant, the insurer shall have the right to demand that the contract be 
recognized as invalid and the related losses caused to him be compensated in the amount that exceeds the 
sum of the insurance premium received by him from the insurant. 
4. The rules, envisaged in Items 1-3 of this Article, shall also be accordingly applied in the case 
where the insurance sum has exceeded the insured as a result of insurance of one and the same facility by 
two or several insurers (double insurance). 
The amount of insurance compensation subject to payment in this case by each insurer shall be cut 
down in proportion to the decrease in the original insurance sum under the relevant insurance contract. 
Article 952. Property Insurance Against Different Insurance Risks 
1. Property and entrepreneurial risk may be insured against different insurance risks both under one 
and several insurance contracts, including contracts with different insurers. 
In these cases the amount of the total insurance sum may exceed the insured value in all contracts. 
2. If the obligation of insurers to pay the insurance compensation for the same consequences of the 
onset of one and the same insured accident follows from two or several contracts, concluded in keeping 
with Item 1 of this Article, the rules, stipulated by Item 4 of Article 951 of this Code, shall be applied to 
such contracts in the respective part. 
Article 953. Coinsurance 
An insurance object may be jointly insured under one insurance contract by several insurers 
(coinsurance). If such contract does not define the rights and obligations of each insurer, they shall be 
liable jointly and severally to the insurant (beneficiary) for the payment of insurance compensation under 
the property insurance contract or of the insurance sum under the personal insurance contract. 
Article 954. Insurance Premium and Insurance Instalments 
1. Insurance premium shall be understood to mean the payment for insurance which the insurant 
(beneficiary) shall be obliged to make to the insurer in the procedure and in time-limits fixed of the 
insurance contract. 
2. In estimating the amount of the insurance premium subject to payment under the insurance 
contract the insurer shall have the right to apply the insurance rates elaborated by him which determine 
the premium, collected from the unit of the insurance sum with due account of the object of insurance and 
the character of insurance risk. 
In cases provided for by the law the amount of the insurance premium shall be estimate in keeping 
with insurance rates, established or regulated by state insurance supervision bodies. 
3. If the insurance contract provides for the payment of the insurance premium by instalments, the 
contract may determine the consequences of the non-payment of regular insurance instalments within the 
established time-limits. 
4. If an insured accident took place before the payment of a regular insurance instalment which is 
overdue, the insurer shall have the right to offset the amount of the overdue insurance instalment at a time 
of estimating the amount of insurance compensation subject to payment under the property insurance 
contract or the insurance sum under the personal insurance contract. 
Article 955. Replacement of the Insured Person 
1. In case where the contract of insurance of the risk of liability for the infliction of harm (Article 
931) has insured the liability of a person other than the insurant, the latter shall have the right, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the contract, to replace this person by another one at any time before the onset of 
the insured accident by notifying the insurer about this in writing. 
2. The insured person, named in a personal insurance contract, may be replaced by another person 
on the initiative of the insurant and with the consent of the insured person and the insurer. 
Article 956. The Replacement of the Beneficiary 
The insurant shall have the right to replace the beneficiary, named in the insurance contract, by 
another person while notifying the insurer about this in writing. The beneficiary, appointed with the 
consent of the insured person (Item 2 of Article 934), may be replaced under the personal insurance 
contract only with the consent of this person. 
The beneficiary may not be replaced by another person after he has fulfilled any obligation under 
the insurance contract or has presented to the insurer his claim for the payment of insurance compensation 
or the insurance sum. 
Article 957. The Beginning of the Validity of the Insurance Contract 
1. An insurance contract, unless it provides for otherwise, shall enter into force at the time of 
payment of the insurance premium or its first instalment. 
2. Insurance, stipulated by the insurance contract, shall extend to the insured accidents which have 
taken place after the entry of the insurance contract into force, unless the contract provides for a different 
period of the started operation of insurance. 
Article 958. The Termination of an Insurance Contract Short of the Term 
1. An insurance contract shall cease to be valid before the beginning of the period for which it was 
concluded, if after its entry into force the possibility of the onset of an insured accident disappeared and 
insurance risk ceased to exist due to the circumstances other than the insured accident. Such 
circumstances include in particular: 
the destruction of insured property for reasons other than the onset of an insured accident; 
the termination of business activity in the statutory order by the person who has insured the 
entrepreneurial risk or civil liability risk, associated with this activity. 
2. The insurant (beneficiary) shall have the right to waive the insurance contract at any time, if by 
the time of his refusal the possibility of the onset of an insured accident had not disappeared to the 
circumstances, referred to in Item 1 of this Article. 
3. If the insurance contract ceases to be valid short of the term due to the circumstances, referred to 
in Item 1 of this Article, the insurer shall have the right to the part of the insurance premium in proportion 
to the time during which insurance was effected. 
If the insurant (beneficiary) waives the insurance contract short of the term, the insurance premium 
paid to the insurer shall not be subject to return, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
Article 959. The Consequences of Increased Insurance Risk During the Validity 
Term of the Insurance Contract 
1. In the period of validity of the property insurance contract the insurant (beneficiary) shall be 
obliged to inform the insurer about the substantial changes which have become known to him in the 
circumstances communicated to the insurer during the conclusion of the contract, if these changes can 
substantially influence insurance risk by increasing it. 
Changes, stipulated in the insurance contract (insurance policy) and in the insurance rules given to 
the insurant, shall be recognized as considerable in any case. 
2. The insurer who is notified about the circumstances entailing the increase risk shall have the right 
to demand the introduction of changes in the insurance contract or the payment of an additional insurance 
premium in proportion to the increase in risk. 
If the insurant (beneficiary) objects to changes in the terms and conditions of the insurance contract 
or to the additional charge to the insurance premium, the insurer shall have the right to demand the 
cancellation of the contract in keeping with the rules, provided for by Chapter 29 of this Code. 
3. In case of default of the obligation by the insurant or beneficiary, provided for by Item 1 of this 
Article, the insurer shall have the right to demand the dissolution of the insurance contract and the 
compensation for the losses caused by the cancellation of the contract (Item 5 of Article 453). 
4. The insurer shall have no right to demand the cancellation of the insurance contract, if 
circumstances entailing the increase in insurance risk have already disappeared. 
5. In case of personal insurance the consequences of changes in insurance risk during the validity 
term of the insurance contract, referred to in Items 2 and 3 of this Article, may take place, if only they are 
expressly envisaged in the contract. 
Article 960. The Assignment of the Rights to Insured Property to Another 
Person 
In case of the assignment of the rights to insured property from the person in whole interest the 
insurance contract was concluded to another person, the rights and obligations under this contract shall be 
transferred to the person to whom the rights to property have passed, exception being made for the cases 
of the compulsory seizure of property on the grounds, referred to in Item 2 of Article 235 of this Code, 
and of the refusal from the right of ownership (Article 236). 
The person to whom the rights to insured property has been transferred shall at once notify the 
insurer about this. 
Article 961. The Notification of the Insurer about the Onset of an Insured 
Accident 
1. Under the property insurance contract the insurant, who was informed about the onset of the 
insurance accident, shall be obliged to notify without delay the insurer or its representative about its 
onset. If the contract provides for a definite date and/or method of notification, the latter shall be effected 
in the stipulated period and the method, indicated in the contract. 
The same obligation lies with the beneficiary who knows about the conclusion of the insurance 
contract in his favour, if he intends to avail himself of the right to insurance compensation. 
2. Default of the obligation, provided for by Item 1 of this Article shall entail the insurer to waive 
the payment of insurance compensation, unless it is provided that the insurer had learnt about the onset of 
the insured accident in due time or that the insurer has no information about this could not influence his 
obligation to pay insurance compensation. 
3. The rules, envisaged by Items 1 and 2 of this Article, shall be applied accordingly to the personal 
insurance contract, if the death of the insured person or the infliction of injury on his health is an insured 
accident. In this case the date of notification of the insurer, specified by the contract may not be less than 
30 days. 
Article 962. The Diminution of Losses from the Insured Accident 
1. With the onset of the insured accident, provided for by the property insurance contract, the 
insurant shall be obliged to take reasonable measures available in the present circumstances in order to 
reduce possible losses. 
In taking such measures the insurant shall follows the instructions of the insurer, if they have been 
brought to the notice of the insurant. 
2. Expenses on the reduction of losses subject to compensation by the insurer shall be reimbursed by 
the insurer, if such expenses were necessary or made in order to fulfil the insurer's instructions, even if 
appropriate measures had proved to be unsuccessful. 
Such expenses shall be reimbursed in proportion to the ratio between the insurance sum and the 
insured value, regardless of the fact that together with the compensation for other losses they can exceed 
the insurance sum. 
3. The insurer shall be released from the compensation for the losses which have arisen in 
consequence of the fact that the insurant failed to take reasonable measures accessible to him in order ot 
reduce possible losses. 
Article 963. The Consequences of the Onset of an Insured Accident Through 
the Fault of the Insurant, Beneficiary or the Insured Person 
1. The insurer shall be released from the payment of insurance compensation or the insurance sum, 
if the insured accident commenced owing to the intent of the insurant, beneficiary or insured person, 
except for the cases, stipulated by Items 2 and 3 of this Article. 
The law may provide for cases of the release of the insurer from the payment of insurance 
compensation under the property insurance contracts in case of the onset of an insured accident owing to 
gross negligence on the part of the insurant or beneficiary. 
2. The insurer shall not be released from the payment of insurance compensation under the contract 
of insurance of civil liability for the infliction of harm on human life or health, if harm was done through 
the fault of the person responsible for it. 
3. The insurer shall not be released from the payment of the insurance sum which is subject under 
the personal insurance contract to payment in the event of death of the insured person, if his death took 
place because of suicide and by that time the insurance contract had been in effect for not less than two 
years. 
Article 964. The Grounds for the Release of the Insurer from the Payment of 
Insurance Compensation and the Insurance Sum 
1. Unless the law or the insurance contract provides for otherwise, the insurer shall be released from 
the payment of insurance compensation and the insurance sum, when the insured accident commenced 
owing to: 
the impact of a nuclear blast, radiation or radioactive contamination; 
the hostilities, and also exercises and other military undertakings; 
the civil war, popular unrest of any kind of strikes. 
2. Unless the property insurance contract provides for otherwise, the insurer shall be released from 
the payment of insurance compensation for the losses sustained owing to the seizure, confiscation, 
requisition, attachment or destruction of insured property according to the orders of state bodies. 
Article 965. The Assignment of the Insurant's Rights to Compensation for 
Damage to the Insurer (Subrogation) 
1. Unless the property insurance contract provides for otherwise, the right of claim which the 
insurant (beneficiary) has to the person, responsible for the losses reimbursed as a result of insurance, 
shall assign within the paid sum of money to the insurer who has paid insurance compensation. However, 
the contract clause that excludes the assignment of the right of claim to the person who deliberately 
caused damage shall be void. 
2. The right of claim that has been transferred to the insurer shall be implemented by him with the 
observance of the rules regulating the relations between the insurant (beneficiary) and the person 
responsible for losses. 
3. The insurant (beneficiary) shall be obliged to give all documents and evidence to the insurer and 
to provide him with all information necessary for the implementation by the insurer of the right of claim 
that has passed to him. 
4. If the insurant (beneficiary) has abandoned his right of claim to the person responsible for the 
losses compensated by the insurer, or if the exercise of this right has become impossible through the fault 
of the insurant (beneficiary), the insurer shall be released from the payment of insurance compensation in 
full or in part and shall have the right to demand the return of the excessively paid sum of compensation. 
Article 966. Limitation Period for Claims Related to Property Insurance 
An action for claims following from the property insurance contract may be filed during two years. 
Article 967. Reinsurance 
1. The risk of payment of insurance compensation or the insurance sum, assumed by the insurer 
under the insurance contract may be insured by him in full or in part at another insurer (insurers) under 
the contract of reinsurance concluded with the latter. 
2. The rules envisaged by the Chapter and subject to application to the insurance of entrepreneurial 
risk shall be applied to the contract of reinsurance, unless the contract of reinsurance provides for 
otherwise. Under the contract of insurance (principal contract) the insurer who has concluded the contract 
of reinsurance shall be deemed to be an insurant in the latter contract. 
3. In case of reinsurance the insurer shall remain liable to the insurant under the principal insurance 
contract for the payment of insurance compensation or the insurance sum. 
4. It shall be permissible to conclude two or several contracts of reinsurance. 
On the reinsurance contracts, see also Letter of the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation No. 
24-00/KP-52 of April 15, 2002  
Article 968. Mutual Insurance 
1. Individuals and legal entities may insure their property and other property interests, referred to in 
Item 2 of Article 929 of this Code, on a mutual basis by means of pooling necessary resources in mutual 
insurance societies. 
2. Mutual insurance societies shall effect the insurance of property and other property interests of 
their members and shall be non-profit making organizations. 
The specific aspects of the legal status of the mutual insurance societies and the conditions of their 
activity shall be determined by the law on mutual insurance in conformity with this Code. 
3. The mutual insurance societies shall insure the property and property interests of their members 
directly on the basis of their membership, unless the societies' constituent documents provide for the 
conclusion of insurance contracts in these cases. 
The rules envisaged by this Chapter shall be applied to the insurance relations between the mutual 
insurance society and its members, unless otherwise stipulated by the law on mutual insurance, the 
constituent documents of the relevant society or by the insurance rules, adopted by it. 
4. Obligatory insurance through mutual insurance shall be allowed in cases, provided for by the law 
on mutual insurance. 
5. As an insurer the mutual insurance society may effect the insurance of the persons who are not 
society members, if such insurance operations are provided for by its constituent documents, if the society 
has been set up in the form of a profit-making organization, has a permit (license) for appropriate 
insurance and meets other requirements, established by the law on the organization of insurance business. 
The insurance of the interests of the persons who are not members of the mutual insurance society 
shall be effected by the society under insurance contracts in keeping with the rules, provided for by this 
Chapter. 
Article 969. Obligatory State Insurance 
1. The law may institute obligatory state insurance of the lives, health and property of civil servants 
of some categories for the purpose of ensuring the social interests of individuals and the interests of the 
State. 
Obligatory state insurance shall be effected at the expense of the financial resources, appropriated 
for these purposes from the corresponding budget to the ministries and other federal executive bodies 
(insurants). 
2. Obligatory state insurance shall be effected directly on the basis of the laws and other legal acts 
on such insurance by state insurance companies and other state organizations (insurers), indicated in these 
acts or on the basis of insurance contracts, concluded by insurers and insurants in accordance with these 
acts. 
3. Obligatory state insurance shall be paid to the insurers in the amount, defined by laws and other 
legal acts on such insurance. 
4. The rules, envisaged by this Chapter, shall be applicable to obligatory state insurance, unless 
otherwise stipulated by the laws and other legal acts on such insurance and unless the contrary follows 
from the substance of relevant insurance relations. 
Article 970. The Application of General Rules for Insurance to Special Types of 
Insurance 
The rules, provided for by this Chapter, shall be applicable to the relations of insurance of foreign 
investments against non-commercial risks, marine insurance, medical insurance, insurance of bank 
deposits and pensions, unless the laws on these types of insurance stipulate otherwise. 
On the marine insurance see Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation No. 81-FZ of April 
30, 1999  
On Insuring Natural Persons' Deposits Made with Banks of the Russian Federation, see Federal Law 
No. 177-FZ of December 23, 2003 
Chapter 49. Agency 
Article 971. Contract of Agency 
1. Under the contract of agency one party (agent) shall undertake to perform certain legal actions on 
behalf and at the expense of the other party (principal). The rights and obligations under the transaction 
completed by the agent shall accrue directly for the principal. 
2. A contract of agency may be concluded with reference to the period during which the agent has 
the right to act on behalf of the principal or without such reference. 
Article 972. Remuneration of the Agent 
1. The principal shall be obliged to pay remuneration to the agent, if this is stipulated by the law, 
other legal acts or the contract of agency. 
In cases where the contract of agency is connected with the business activity of both parties or one 
of them, the principal shall be obliged to pay remuneration to the agent, unless otherwise stipulated by the 
contract. 
2. In the absence of the clause on the amount of remuneration or the procedure of its payment in the 
remunerated contract of agency, remuneration shall be paid after the execution of agency in the amount, 
estimated in keeping with Item 3 of Article 424 of this Code. 
3. The agent who acts as a commercial representative (Item 1 of Article 184) shall have the right to 
withhold, in keeping with Article 359 of this Code, the things he has at his disposal, which are subject to 
the transfer to the principal as security of his claims under the contract of agency. 
Article 973. The Execution of Agency in Accordance with the Trustee's 
Instructions 
1. The agent shall be obliged to perform the agency given to him in accordance with the principal's 
instructions. The instructions shall be lawful, practicable and concrete. 
2. The agent shall have the right to depart from the principal's instructions, if it is necessary under 
the existing circumstances and in the interests of the principal and if the agent could not inquire the 
principal in advance or had not received an answer to his inquiry within a reasonable period of time. The 
agent shall be obliged to notify the principal about the admitted departures as soon as such information 
has become possible. 
3. The agent acting a commercial representative (Item 1 of Article 184) may be given by the 
principal the right to depart from the instructions of the principal in his interests without a preliminary 
inquiry about this. In this case the commercial representative shall be obliged to notify the principal about 
the admitted departures within a reasonable period of time, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of 
agency. 
Article 974. The Obligations of the Agent 
The agent shall be obliged: 
to perform the agency given to him in person, except for the cases, indicated in Article 976 of this 
Code; 
to communicate to the principal all information about the progress of the execution of agency at his 
request; 
to convey to the principal without delay all the things received under the deals, performed in 
pursuance of the agency; 
to return without delay to the principal the power of attorney whose validity term has, not expired 
upon the execution of agency or in case of the termination of the contract of agency before it is executed 
and to submit a report with appended covering documents, if this is required by the terms and conditions 
of the contract or the character of agency. 
Article 975. The Obligations of the Principal 
1. The principal shall be obliged to issue to the agent a power of attorney (powers of attorney) for 
the performance of legal actions provided for by the contract of agency, except for the cases, stipulated by 
the second paragraph of Item 1 of Article 182 of this Code. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract, the principal shall be obliged: 
to compensate for the agent's costs; 
to provide the agent with pecuniary means needed for the execution of agency. 
3. The principal shall be obliged to accept from the agent without delay all that has been performed 
in accordance with the contract of agency. 
4. The principal shall be obliged to pay remuneration to the agency, if in keeping with Article 972 of 
this Code the contract of agency is remunerated. 
Article 976. The Transference of the Execution of Agency 
1. The agent shall have the right to transfer the execution of agency to another person (substitute) 
only in cases and on the terms, provided for by Article 187 of this Code. 
2. The principal shall have the right to challenge the substitute chosen as an agent. 
3. If a possible substitute of the agent is named in the contract of agency, the agent shall not be 
answerable either for his choice or for the conduct of his affairs. 
If the right of the agent to transfer the execution of agency to another person is not provided for by 
the contract or is provided for, but the substitute is not named in it, the agent shall be answerable for the 
choice of the substitute. 
Article 977. The Termination of the Contract of Agency 
1. The contract of agency shall be terminated in consequence of: 
the revocation of agency by the principal; 
the refusal of the agent; 
the death of the principal or the agent, the recognition of any of them as legally unfit, specially 
disabled or missing. 
2. The principal shall have the right to revoke the agency, while the agent shall have the right to 
abandon it at any time. An agreement on the refusal from this right shall be void. 
3. The party which waives the contract of agency that provides for the agent's actions as a 
commercial representative shall notify the other party about the termination of the contract within 30 
days, unless the contract provides for a longer period. 
In case of the reorganization of a legal entity that is a commercial representative the principal shall 
have the right to revoke the agency without such a preliminary notification. 
Article 978. The Consequences of the Termination of the Contract of Agency 
1. If a contract of agency is terminated before the agency has been executed by the agent in full, the 
principal shall be obliged to compensate for the agent's expenses incurred during the execution of the 
agency, and when the agent was to receive remuneration, to pay to him the remuneration as well in 
proportion to the work done by him. This rule shall not be applied to the execution by the agent of the 
agency after he has known or should have known about the termination of the agency. 
2. The revocation of the commission by the principal shall not be a ground for the compensation for 
the losses caused to the agent by the termination of the contract of agency, except for the cases of the 
termination of the contract that provides for the operation of the agent as a commercial representative. 
3. The refusal of the agent to execute the commission of the principal shall not be a ground for the 
compensation for the losses caused to the principal by the termination of the contract of agency, except 
for the cases of the agent's refusal in the conditions when the principal has no possibility of insuring his 
interests in a different way, and also in cases of the refusal to execute the contract that provide for the 
operation of the agent as a commercial representative. 
Article 979. The Obligations of the Heirs of the Agent and the Liquidator of the 
Legal Entity That Acts as an Agent 
In case of death of the agent, his heirs shall be obliged to inform the principal about the termination 
of the contract of agency and take measures needed to protect the principal's property, in particular to 
preserve his things and documents and thereupon to transfer this property to the principal. 
The same obligation shall lie with the liquidator of the legal entity that acts as an agent. 
Chapter 50. Actions in the Interest of Other People  
Without Commission 
Article 980. Terms for Actions in the Interest of Other People 
1. Actions without commission, other instruction or the interested person's consent promised in 
advance for the purpose of averting harm to his personality or property, executing his obligation or in 
other legitimate interests (actions in the interest of other people) shall ne performed due to the obvious 
benefit or profit and to the actual and probable intentions of the interested person and with care and 
diligence vision requisite in the circumstances of the case. 
2. The rules, envisaged by this Chapter, shall not be applied to actions in the interest of other 
persons, committed by state and municipal bodies, for which such actions are one of the purposes of their 
activity. 
Article 981. Notification of the Interested Person about Actions in His Interest 
1. A person who acts in the interest of another person shall be obliged to inform the interested 
person about this at the first opportunity and wait during a reasonable period of time for his decision on 
the approval or disapproval of the undertaken actions, unless such waiting entails serious damage to the 
interested person. 
2. It shall not be required to specially inform the interested individual about the actions in his 
interest, if such actions are undertaken in his presence. 
Article 982. The Consequences of the Approval by the Interested Person of 
Actions in His Interests 
If a person for the benefit of whom actions are taken without his commission adopts these actions, 
the rules for the contract of agency or a different contract that corresponds to the character of the 
undertaken actions shall be applied to the relations between the parties, even if this approval was oral. 
Article 983. The Consequences of the Non-approval by the Interested Person of 
Actions in His Interest 
1. Actions in the interest of other people committed after it has become known to the performer of 
these actions that they are not approved by the interested person shall not entail obligations for the latter 
either in respect of the performer of these actions or of third persons. 
2. Actions undertaken to prevent danger for the life of the person who is imperiled shall also be 
allowed against the will of this person, while the discharge of the obligation of maintaining anybody shall 
be allowed against the will of the person charged with this obligation. 
Article 984. Compensation for Losses for the Person Who Acted in the Interest 
of Other People 
1. Requisite expenses and other real damage sustained by the person who acted in the interest of 
other people in accordance with the rules, provided for by this Chapter, shall be subject to compensation 
by the interested person, with the exception of the expenses incurred by the actions referred to in Item 1 
of Article 983 of this Code. 
The right to compensation for necessary and other real damage shall also be retained in case where 
actions in the interest of other people have not brought about the expected result. However, in case of 
preventing damage to the property of another person the amount of compensation shall not exceed the 
value of property. 
2. Expenses and other losses of the person who acted in the interest of other people, incurred by him 
in connection with the actions undertaken after the receipt of approval by the interested person (Article 
982), shall be reimbursed according to the rules for a contract of the relevant type. 
Article 985. Remuneration for Actions in the Interest of Other People 
A person whose actions in the interest of other people have led to the result positive for the 
interested person shall have the right to receive remuneration, if such right is provided for by law, the 
agreement with the interested person or the business turnover customs. 
Article 986. The Consequences of a Transaction in the Interest of Other People 
The obligations under the transaction concluded in the interest of other people shall pass to the 
person in whose interest it has been made, subject to the approval by him of this transaction and if the 
other party does not object against such passage or has known or should have known during the 
conclusion of the transaction that it was concluded in the interest of other people. 
With the passage of obligations under such transaction to the person in whose interest it was 
concluded, the rights under this transaction shall also be transferred to the latter person. 
Article 987. Unjust Enrichment in Consequences of Actions in the Interest of 
Other People 
If actions which are not directly aimed at the security of the interests of another person, including in 
the case where the person who has committed them mistakenly supposed that he acts in his own interest, 
have led to the unjust enrichment of another person, the rules, provided for by Chapter 60 of this Code 
shall be applied. 
Article 988. The Compensation for the Harm Inflicted by Actions in the Interest 
of Other People 
Relations involved in the compensation of the harm inflicted by actions in the interest of other 
people on the interested person or third persons, shall be regulated by the rules of Chapter 59 of this 
Code. 
Article 989. The Report of the Person Who Acted in the Interest of Other 
People 
The person who acted in the interest of other people shall be obliged to submit to the person in 
whose interest such actions have been committed his report with an indication of the obtained incomes 
and incurred expenses and other losses. 
Chapter 51. Commission 
Article 990. The Contract of Commission 
1. Under the contract of commission one party (commission agent) shall undertake to perform one 
or several transaction on its behalf on the instruction of the other party (principal) for remuneration at the 
expense of the principal. 
In a transaction conducted by the commission agent with a third person the commission agent shall 
acquire and become to be bound, although the principal was named in the transaction or entered in direct 
relations with the third person in the performance of the transaction. 
2. A contract of commission may be concluded for an indefinite period or without reference of its 
validity term with reference or without reference of the territory of its execution, with the obligation of 
the principal not to give to third persons the right of making in his interests and at his expense 
transactions, the conduct of which has been entrusted to the commission agent, or without such 
obligation, with conditions or without them for the assortment of goods which are the subject of 
commission. 
3. The law and other legal acts may provide for specificity of the contract of commission of 
particular kinds. 
Article 991. Commission Fee 
1. The principal shall be obliged to pay a commission fee to the commission agent and when the 
commission agent has stood the surety for the execution of the transaction by a third person (del credere) 
the principal shall also pay an additional fee in the amount and in the order fixed in the contract of 
commission. 
If the contract does not provide for the amount of the fee or the procedure for its payment and the 
amount of the fee cannot be determined on the basis of the contract, the fee shall be paid after the 
execution of the contract of commission in the amount, defined in conformity with Item 3 of Article 424 
of this Code. 
2. If a contract of commission has not been executed for the reasons depending on the principal, the 
commission agent shall retain the right of a commission fee, and also to compensation for the incurred 
expenses. 
Article 992. The Execution of a Commission Order 
The order assumed by the commission agent the latter shall be obliged to perform on the conditions 
most favorable for the principal in accordance with the instructions of the principal, and in the absence if 
such instructions of the principal, and in the absence of such instructions in the contract of commission 
the commission agent shall be obliged to perform the order in keeping with the business turnover customs 
or other usual requirements. 
In case where the commission agent has performed a transaction on the conditions more favourable 
than those which have been indicated by the principal, the additional benefit shall be divided between the 
principal and the commission agent, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement of the parties. 
Article 993. Liability for the Non-execution of the Transaction Concluded for 
the Principal 
1. The commission agent shall not be liable to the principal for the non-execution by a third person 
of the transaction concluded with him at the expense of the principal, except for the cases where the 
commission agent has not displayed the necessary circumspection in the choice of this person or has 
stood surety for the performance of the transaction (del credere). 
2. If a third person does not fulfil the transaction concluded with him by the commission agent, the 
latter shall be obliged to inform at once the principal about this, gather necessary evidence, and also to 
transfer to him the rights in this transaction on the demand of the principal and with the observance of the 
rules for the assignment of a claim (Articles 382-386, 388 and 389). 
3. The cession of rights to the principal in a transaction on the basis of Item 2 of this Article shall be 
allowed, regardless of the agreement of the commission agent with a third person, which bans or restricts 
such cession. This shall not release the commission agent from liability to a third person in connection 
with the cession of the right in violation of the agreement on its ban or restriction. 
Article 994. Subcommission 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of commission, the commission agent shall have the 
right to conclude a contract of subcommission with another person for the purpose of executing this 
contract, remaining to be liable for the actions of the sub-commissioner to the principal. 
Under the contract of subcommission the commission agent shall acquire the rights and obligations 
of the principal in respect of the subcommissioner. 
2. Until the termination of the contract of commission the principal shall not have the right to enter 
into relations with the subcommissioner without the consent of the commission agent, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the contract of commission. 
Article 995. Departures from the Principal's Instructions 
1. The commission agent shall have the right to depart from the principal's instructions, if this is 
necessary under the present circumstances of the case in the interests of the principal and the commission 
agent could not acquire the principal in advance or did not receive an answer to his inquiry within a 
reasonable period of time. The commission agent shall be obliged to notify the principal about the 
departures made as soon as the notification has become possible. 
The commission agent who acts as a businessman may be given by the principal the right to depart 
from his instructions without a preliminary inquiry. In this case the commission agent shall be obliged to 
notify the principal about the departures made within a reasonable period of time, unless otherwise 
stipulated by the contract of commission. 
2. The commission agent who has sold property at the price below that agreed upon with the 
principal, shall be obliged to compensate to the latter for the difference, unless he proves that he had no 
possibility of selling property at the agreed price and the sale at a lower price prevented still greater 
losses. In case where the commission agent has obliged to inquire the principal in advance, the 
commissioner shall also prove that he had no possibility of receiving the preliminary consent of the 
principal with a departure from his instructions. 
3. If the commission agent has bought property at the price higher than that agreed with the 
principal, the latter, if he does not wish to accept such purchase, shall be obliged to state about this to the 
commission agent within a reasonable period of time upon the receipt from him the notification about the 
conclusion of the transaction with a third person. Otherwise the purchase shall be recognized as accepted 
by the principal. 
If the commission agent stated hat he accepts the difference in prices at its expense, the principal 
shall not have the right to waive the transaction concluded for him. 
Article 996. The Rights to the Things Which Are the Subject of Commission 
1. Things which the commission agent received from the principal or brought at the expense of the 
principal shall be the property of the latter. 
2. In accordance with Article 359 of this Code the commissioner shall have the right to withhold the 
things which he has and which are subject to the transfer to the principal or the person indicated by the 
principal in security for his claims under the contract of commission. 
In the event of declaring a principal insolvent (bankrupt) the said right of the commissioner shall be 
ceased and his claims to the principal within the cost of things which he has retained shall be satisfied in 
keeping with Article 360 of this Code on a par with the claims secured with pledge. 
Article 997. The Satisfaction of the Claims of the Commission Agent from the 
Sums of Money Due to the Principal 
The commission agent shall have the right, in accordance with Article 410 of this Code, to withhold 
all the sums of money due to him under the contract of commission, received by him from the principal. 
However, the principal's creditors who enjoy advantage with regard to the pledgees in respect of the 
sequence of satisfying their claims from the sums of money withheld by the commission agent. 
Article 998. The Liability of the Commission Agent for the Loss and Shortage 
of, or Damage to, the Principal's Property 
1. The commission agent shall be liable to the principal for the loss and shortage of, or damage to, 
the principal's property held by him. 
2. If in this property there are damages or shortages during the acceptance by the commission agent 
of property, forwarded, by the principal or received by the commission agent for the principal, the 
damages and shortages being noticed in case of an outward inspection, and also has been inflicted by 
anybody on the principal's property held by the commission agent, the commission agent shall be obliged 
to take measures protecting the rights of the principal, to gather necessary evidence and to inform the 
principal about this without delay. 
3. The commission agent who has not insured the principal's property held by him shall be liable for 
his only in cases where the principal has prescribed him to insure property at the expense of the principal 
or where the insurance of this property by the commission agent is provided for by the contract of 
commission or by the business turnover customs. 
Article 999. The Report by the Commission Agent 
Upon the execution of the instruction the commission agent shall be obliged to submit to the 
principal his report and to give him all that he has received under the contract of commission. The 
principal who has objections to the report shall be obliged to inform the commission agent during 30 days 
since the receipt of the report, unless the agreement between the parties has fixed a different period of 
time. Otherwise the report shall be deemed to be accepted in the absence of a different agreement. 
Article 1000. The Acceptance by the Principal of Everything Performed Under 
the Contract of Commission 
The principal shall be obliged: 
to accept from the commission agent everything performed under the contract of commission; 
to inspect the property acquired by the commission agent for him and to inform the latter without 
delay about the defects discovered in this property; 
to release the commission agent from the obligation assumed to a third person in the execution of 
the commission order. 
Article 1001. Compensation for the Expenses to Be Incurred in the Execution 
of a Commission Order 
The principal shall be obliged to compensate for the sums of money, spent by the commission agent 
to execute the commission order in addition to the payment of a commission fee and in requisite cases 
also an additional fee for del credere. 
The commission agent shall have no right to recompense the expenses on the storage of the 
principal's property held by him, unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the contract of commission. 
Article 1002. The Termination of the Contract of Commission 
The contract of commission shall be terminated in consequence of: 
the refusal of the principal to execute the contract; 
the refusal of the commission agent to execute the contract; 
the refusal of the principal to execute the contract in cases provided for by the law or the contract; 
the death of the commission agent, the recognition of him as legally unfit, specially incapable or 
missing; 
the recognition of an individual businessman, who is a commission agent, as insolvent (bankrupt). 
In case of declaring that the commission agent is insolvent (bankrupt), his rights and obligations in 
transactions, committed by him for the principal in pursuance of the instructions of the latter, shall pass to 
the principal. 
Article 1003. The Revocation of a Commission Note by the Principal 
1. The principal shall have the right to refuse at any time to execute the contract of commission by 
revoking the note given to the commission agent. The commission agent shall have the right to demand 
the compensation for the losses caused by the revocation of the order. 
2. In case where a contract of commission has been concluded without an indication of its validity 
term the principal shall be obliged to notify the commission agent about the termination of the contract 
within 30 days, unless the property provides for a longer period of notification. 
In this case the principal shall be obliged to pay to the commission agent a charge for the deals made 
by him before the termination of the contract, and also to reimburse to the commission agent the 
expenses, incurred by him before the cessation of the contract. 
3. In case of revocation of the note the principal shall be obliged, within the period fixed by the 
contract of commission agent, and if such period is not fixed, also to discharge at once of his property 
held by the commission agent. If the principal fails to discharge this obligation, the commission agent 
shall have the right to put the property in storage at the expense of the principal or to sell it at the price 
most remunerative for the principal. 
Article 1004. The Refusal of the Commission Agent to Execute the Contract of 
Commission 
1. The commission agent shall have no right, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of 
commission, to refuse to execute it, with the exception of the case where the contract was concluded 
without an indication of its validity term. In this case the commission agent shall notify the principal 
about the termination of the contract within 30 days, unless the contract provides for a longer period of 
time. 
The commission agent shall be obliged to take measures needed for he safety of the principal's 
property. 
2. Unless the contract of commission stipulates a different period of time, the principal shall dispose 
of his property under the authority of the commission agent within 15 days since the day of the receipt of 
the notice about the commission agent's refusal to execute the note. If he does not discharge this 
obligation, the commission agent shall have the right to put the property in storage at the expense of the 
principal or to sell it at the price most remunerative for the principal. 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of commission, the commission agent who has 
refused to perform the note shall retain the right to a commission charge for the deals made by him before 
the termination of the contract, and also to the compensation for the expenses incurred before this time. 
Chapter 52. Agency Service 
Article 1005. The Brokerage Contract 
1. Under the brokerage contract one party (agent) shall undertake for remuneration to perform legal 
and other actions on the instruction of the other party (principal) on his own behalf, but at the expense of 
the principal or on behalf and at the expense of the principal. 
In a transaction made by the agent with a third person in his own name and at the expense of the 
principal, the agent shall acquire rights and become to be bound, although the principal has been named in 
the transaction or entered in direct relations with a third party for the execution of the transaction. 
In a transaction made by the agent with a third person on behalf and at the expense of the principal, 
the rights and obligations shall arise for the principal. 
2. In cases where the brokerage contract concluded in written form provides for the agent's general 
obligations for making deals on behalf of the principal, the latter shall have no right in his relations with 
third persons to refer to the lack of requisite obligations by the agent, unless he proves that the third 
person knew or should have known about the limitation of the agent's obligations. 
3. The brokerage contract may be concluded for an indefinite period or without an indication of its 
validity term. 
4. The law may provide for the specific aspects of particular types of the brokerage contract. 
Article 1006. The Bonus of the Agent 
The principal shall be obliged to pay to the agent the bonus in the amount and in the order 
established by the brokerage contract. 
If the brokerage contract does not provide for the amount of the nobis of the agent and the latter 
cannot be estimated on the basis of he contractual terms, the bonus shall be subject to payment in amount, 
specified in keeping with Item 3 of Article 424 of this Code. 
In the absence of contractual terms on the procedure for the payment of the agent's bonus, the 
principal shall be obliged to pay the bonus during a week since the time of the submission of a report by 
the agent to him for the past period, unless a different procedure for the payment of the bonus follows for 
the substance of the contract or the business turnover customs. 
Article 1007. The Restriction of the Rights of the Principal and the Agent by 
the Brokerage Contract 
1. The brokerage contract may provide for the principal's obligation not to conclude similar 
brokerage contracts with other agents acting on the territory defined by the contract or to refrain from the 
independent activity on this territory, which is analogous to the activity that makes up the subject of the 
brokerage contract. 
2. The brokerage contract may provide for the agent's obligation not to conclude with other 
principals similar contracts, which shall be executed on the territory coinciding in full or in part with the 
territory indicated in the contract. 
3. The terms and conditions of the contract, by virtue of which the agent shall have the right to sell 
goods, perform works or render services for an exclusively definite category of buyers (customers) or 
exclusively for the buyers (customers) who have their place of location or residence on the territory 
defined by the contract, shall be void. 
Article 1008. Reports by the Agent 
1. During the performance of the brokerage contract the agent shall be obliged to submit his reports 
to the principal in the order and in the time-limits which are provided for by the contract. In the absence 
of appropriate terms and conditions in the contract, reports shall be submitted by the agent to the extent of 
the execution of the contract by him or upon the expiry of the validity term of the contract. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the brokerage contract, the agent's report shall be enclosed with 
necessary proof of the expenses incurred by the agent at the expense of the principal. 
3. The principal who has objections to the agent's report shall be obliged to communicate them to 
the agent within 30 days since the day of receipt of he contract, unless the agreement of the parties 
stipulates a different period of time. Otherwise the report shall be deemed to be accepted by the principal. 
Article 1009. The Sub-agency Contract 
1. Unless otherwise stipulated by the brokerage contract, the agent shall have the right to conclude a 
sub-agency contract with another person for the purpose of executing the contract, being liable for the 
actions of the sub-agent to the principal. The brokerage contract may provide for the agent's obligation to 
conclude a sub-agency contract with or without an indication of concrete terms and conditions of such 
contract. 
2. The sub-agent shall have no right to conclude with third parties transactions on behalf of the 
principal under the brokerage contract, except for the cases where in conformity with Item 1 of Article 
187 of this Code, the sub-agent may act on the basis of substitution. The procedure and consequences of 
such substitution shall be determined according to the rules, provided for by Article 976 of this Code. 
Article 1010. The Termination of the Brokerage Contract 
The brokerage contract shall cease in consequence of: 
the refusal of one of the parties to execute the contract concluded without fixing the period of the 
completion of its validity; 
the death of the agent, the recognition of him as legally unfit, specially incapable or missing; 
the recognition of the individual businessman who is an agent as insolvent (bankrupt). 
Article 1011. The Application of the Rules for Contracts of Agency and 
Commission to the Relations of Agents 
The rules provided for by Chapter 49 or Chapter 51 of this Code shall be applied accordingly to the 
relations following from the brokerage contract depending on the fact whether the agent acts under the 
terms and conditions of this contract on behalf of the principal or in his own name, unless these rules 
contradict the provisions of this Chapter or the substance of the brokerage contract. 
Chapter 53. Trust of Estate 
Article 1012. The Contract of Trust of Estate 
1. Under the contract of trust of estate one party (settler of trust) shall transfer estate in trust to the 
other party (trust administrator) for a definite period, while the other party shall undertake to administer 
this estate in the interests of the seller of trust or the person indicated by him (beneficiary). 
The transfer of estate in trust shall not involve the assignment of the right of its ownership to the 
trust administrator. 
2. While implementing the trust of estate, the trust administrator shall have the right to perform any 
legal and actual actions in the interests of the beneficiary in keeping with contract of trust of estate. 
The law or the contract may provide for restrictions on individual actions for the trust of estate. 
3. Transactions with estate transferred in trust shall be made by the trust administrator oh his behalf 
by pointing out that he acts as such administrator. This proviso shall be deemed to be observed, if during 
the actions which do not require the written form the other party is informed about them by the trust 
administrator acting in this capacity and if the written documents bear the note T.A. after the name of the 
trust administrator. 
In the absence of the indication about the operation of the trust administrator in this capacity, the 
trust administrator shall bind himself to the third persons and shall be liable to them only within the 
property belonging to him. 
Article 1013. The Object of Trust 
1. The objects of trust may include enterprises and other property complexes, particular facilities 
relating to real estate, securities, rights certified by non-documentary securities, exclusive rights and other 
property. 
2. Money may not be an independent object of trust with the exception of cases, provided for by the 
law. 
3. Estate held in economic or operative management may not be transferred in trust. The transfer in 
trust of estate held in economic or operative management is possible only after the liquidation of the legal 
entity which was in charge of property or carried out operative management or after the termination of the 
right of economic or operative management and its passage into the possession of the owner on other 
statutory grounds. 
Article 1014. The Seller of Trust 
The owner of estate or another person in cases, specified by Article 1026 of this Code, shall be a 
seller of trust. 
Article 1015. The Trust Administrator 
1. An individual businessman or a products-making organization may be a trust administrator, 
exception being made for a unitarian enterprise. 
In cases where the trust of estate is exercised on the statutory grounds, the post of the trust 
administrator may be held by the individual who is not a businessman or by the non-profit-making 
organization with the exception of an institution. 
2. Estate shall not be transferred in trust to a state body or a local self-government body. 
3. The trust administrator may not be a beneficiary under the contract of trust of estate. 
Article 1016. The Substantial Terms and Conditions of the Contract of Trust of 
Estate 
1. The contract of trust of estate shall indicate the following: 
the structure of estate transferred in trust; 
the name of the legal entity or the individual in whose interest the trust of estate is exercised (the 
seller of trust or the beneficiary); 
the amount and form of remuneration for the administrator, if it is provided for by the contract; 
the term of validity of the contract. 
2. A contract of trust of estate shall be concluded for a term not exceeding five years. For particular 
types of estate transferred in trust the law may provide for other maximum terms for which contracts may 
be concluded. 
In the absence of the statement by one of the parties on the termination of a contract upon the expiry 
of its validity term, it shall be deemed to be prolonged for the same period and on the same conditions 
which were provided by the contract. 
On the procedure for transferring into trust the shares in federal ownership of the joint-stock 
companies set up in the course of privatization and concluding trust agreements for managing these 
shares see Decision of the Government of the Russian Federation No. 989 of August 7, 1997  
Article 1017. The Form of the Contract of Trust of Estate 
1. A contract of trust of estate shall be concluded in writing. 
2. A contract of trust of real estate shall be concluded in the form, provided for the contract of sale 
of real estate. The transfer of real estate in trust shall be subject to state registration in the same procedure 
that governs the transfer of the right of ownership of this property. 
On the state registration of trust management and wardship connected with real estate see Federal 
Law of the Russian Federation No. 122-FZ of July 21, 1997 
3. The non-observance of the form of the contract of trust of estate or of the requirement for the 
registration of the transfer of real estate in trust shall invalidate the contract. 
Article 1018. The Separation of Estate Held in Trust 
1. Estate transferred in trust shall be separated from the other estate of the seller of trust, and also 
from the estate of the trust administrator. This estate shall reflect in the trust administrator's separate 
balance-sheet, with an independent accounting being kept on its basis. A separate bank account shall be 
opened for settlements in the activity associated with trust. 
2. The execution for the debts of the settler of trust on the estate transferred by him in trust shall not 
be levied with the exception of the insolvency (bankruptcy) of this person. In case of the bankruptcy of 
the settler of trust the trust of this estate shall be ceased and it shall be included in the bankrupt's estate. 
Article 1019. The Transfer in Trust of Estate Encumbered with Pledge 
1. The transfer of the pledged estate in trust shall not deprive the pledgee of the right to every 
execution on this estate. 
2. The trust administrator shall be warned about the fact that the estate transferred in trust has been 
encumbered with pledge. If the trust administrator did not know and should not know about the estate 
encumbered with pledge and given to him in trust, he shall have the right to demand in court the 
cancellation of the contract of trust of estate and the payment of remuneration for one year that is due to 
him under the contract. 
Article 1020. The Rights and Obligations of the Trust Administrator 
1. The trust administrator shall exercise the proprietary rights to the estate transferred in trust within 
the limits prescribed by the law and the contract of trust of estate. The trust administrator shall dispose of 
real estate in cases, provided for by the contract of trust of estate. 
2. The rights, acquired by the trust administrator as a result of actions in the trust of estate, shall be 
included in the estate transferred in trust. The obligations arising as a result of such actions of the trust 
administrator shall be executed at the expense of this estate. 
3. In order to protect the rights to estate in trust, the trust administrator shall have the right to 
demand any removal of the infringement of his rights (Articles 301, 302, 304 and 305). 
4. The trust administrator shall submit to the seller of trust and the beneficiary the report on his 
activity in the time-limits and in the procedure, established by the contract of trust of estate. 
Article 1021. The Transfer of Trust of Estate 
1. The trust administrator shall effect the trust of estate in person, except for the cases, provided for 
by Item 2 of this Article. 
2. The trust administrator may charge another person with the performance of actions necessary for 
the trust of estate on behalf of the trust administrator, if he is authorized therefor by the contract of trust of 
estate or has received the settler's consent with this in written form, or is forced to do so by virtue of 
circumstances for the safeguarding the interests of the settler of trust or the beneficiary and has no 
possibility of receiving the settler's instructions in a reasonable period of time. 
The trust administrator shall be answerable for the actions of the agent chosen by him as for his own 
actions. 
Article 1022. The Liability of the Trust Administrator 
1. The trust administrator who failed to show due care for the interests of the beneficiary or the 
settler of trust in case of trust of estate shall reimburse to the beneficiary the lost profit during the trust of 
estate and to the settler of trust - the losses caused by the loss of, or damage to, estate with due account of 
its depreciation, and also the lost profit. 
The trust administrator shall be liable for the inflicted losses, unless he proves that these losses were 
caused by force majeure or by the actions of the beneficiary or the settler of trust. 
2. The obligations in the transaction made by the trust administrator with the excess of power or 
with the contravention of the limitations established for him shall be borne by the trust administrator in 
person. If the third persons participating in the transaction did not know or should not have known about 
the excess of power or about the established limitations, the obligations which have arisen shall be subject 
to satisfaction in the procedure, established by Item 3 of this Article. In this case the settler of trust may 
demand that the trust administrator should recompense the losses sustained by him. 
3. The debts in obligations which have arisen in connection with trust of estate shall be repaid at the 
expense of this estate. If such estate is not sufficient, execution may be levied on the estate of the trust 
administrator; and if his estate proves to be insufficient as well, execution may be levied on the estate of 
the settler of trust that has not been placed in trust. 
4. The contract of trust of estate may provide for the submission of mortgage by the trust 
administrator in the security for the reparation of the losses that can be caused to the settler of trust or the 
beneficiary by the improper execution of the contract of trust. 
Article 1023. Remuneration for the Trust Administrator 
The trust administrator shall have the right to the remuneration, provided for by the contract of trust 
of estate, and also to the reimbursement of the necessary expenses, made by him during the trust of estate, 
at the expense of the incomes from the use of this property. 
Article 1024. The Termination of the Contract of Trust of Estate 
1. The contract of trust of estate shall be terminated in consequence of: 
the death of the individual who is a beneficiary or the liquidation of the legal entity - also a 
beneficiary - unless the contract provides for otherwise; 
the refusal of the beneficiary to receive benefits under the contract, unless the latter provides for 
otherwise; 
the death of the individual who is a trust administrator, the recognition of him as legally unfit, 
specially incapable or missing, and also the recognition of the individual businessman as insolvent 
(bankrupt); 
the refusal of the trust administrator or the settler of trust to carry out trust in connection with the 
impossibility for the trust administrator to effect in person the trust of estate; 
the rejection by the settler of trust of the contract for the reason other than that indicated in the fifth 
paragraph of this Item, provided that the remuneration specified by the contract has been paid to the trust 
administrator; 
the recognition of the businessman who is the settler of trust as insolvent (bankrupt). 
2. If one party abandons the contract of trust of estate, the other party shall be notified about this 
three months before the termination of the contract, unless the latter provides for a different date of 
notification. 
3. With the cessation of the contract of trust the estate held in trust shall be transferred to the settler 
of trust, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract. 
Article 1025. The Transfer of Securities in Trust 
In case of the transfer of securities in trust, they may be pooled for the transfer in trust by different 
persons. 
The authority of the trust administrator to dispose of securities shall be defined in the contract of 
trust. 
The specific features of trust of securities shall be determined by the law. 
The rules of this Article shall be applied accordingly to the rights, certified by non-documentary 
securities (Article 149). 
Article 1026. Trust of Estate on the Grounds Stipulated by the Law 
1. Trust of estate may be instituted in the following cases: 
on account of the need for the permanent trust of the estate of the ward in cases provided for by 
Article 38 of this Code; 
on the grounds of the restatement which has appointed the testamentary executor; 
on other grounds specified by the law. 
2. The rules provided for by this Chapter shall be applied accordingly to the relations involving the 
trust of estate, instituted on the grounds, referred to in Item 1 of this Article, unless otherwise stipulated 
by the law and unless the contrary follows from the essence of such relations. 
In cases where trust of estate is instituted on the grounds, referred to in Item 1 of this Article, the 
rights of the settler of trust, provided for by the rules of this Chapter, shall belong accordingly to the body 
of guardianship, the testamentary execution or any other person, indicated in the law. 
Chapter 54. The Commercial Concession 
Article 1027. The Contract of the Commercial Concession 
1. Under the contract of the commercial concession one party (right holder) shall undertake to grant 
to the other party (user) for remuneration for a definite term or without reference to a term the right of 
using in the business of the user a complex of exclusive rights belonging to the right holder, including the 
right to the firm's name and/or the commercial designation of the right holder, to protected commercial 
information, and also to other contracted objects of exclusive rights - trademarks, service marks, etc. 
2. The contract of the commercial concession shall provide for the use of a complex of exclusive 
rights, the business standing and commercial know-how of the right holder in a definite scope (in 
particular with the establishment of a minimum and/or maximum extent of use), with an indication or 
without indication of the territory of use with reference to a certain sphere of business activity (sales of 
goods obtained from the right holder or produced by the user, other trade activity, performance of works 
and provision of services). 
3. Commercial organizations and private persons registered as individual entrepreneurs may be the 
parties to the contract of the commercial concession. 
Article 1028. The Form and Registration of the Contract of the Commercial 
Concession 
1. A contract of the commercial concession shall be concluded in writing. 
The non-observance of the written form shall invalidate the contract. Such contract shall be deemed 
to be void. 
2. A contract of the commercial concession shall be registered by the body which has registered the 
legal entity or the individual entrepreneur acting as a right holder under the contract. 
See the Procedure for the registration of commercial concession (subconcession) agreements, 
approved by Order of the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation No. 105n of August 12, 2005  
If the right holder has been registered as a legal entity or an individual entrepreneur in a foreign 
State, the contract of the commercial concession shall be registered by the body which has registered the 
legal entity or individual entrepreneur who is a user. 
In relations with third persons parties the parties to the contract of the commercial concession shall 
have the right to refer to the contract only since the time of its registration. 
A contract of the commercial concession of the use of the object protected by patent legislation shall 
also be subject to registration by the federal executive body in the sphere of patents and trademarks. The 
non-observance of this requirements shall invalidate the contract. 
Article 1029. The Commercial Subconcession 
1. The contract of the commercial concession may provide for the right of the user to authorize other 
persons to make use of the complex of exclusive rights granted to him or a part of this complex on the 
terms of subconcession, agreed upon with the right holder or defined by the contract of the commercial 
concession. The contract may provide for the obligation of the user to submit during a definite period of 
time to a definite number of persons the right of using said rights on the terms of the subconcession. 
A contract of the commercial subconcession may not be concluded for a longer period than the 
contract of the commercial concession, on the basis of which it is concluded. 
2. If a contract of the commercial concession is invalid, the contracts of the commercial 
subconcession concluded on its basis shall be invalid as well. 
3. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of the commercial concession, concluded for a 
definite term, the rights and obligations of the second right holder under the contract of the commercial 
subconcession (the user under the contract of the commercial concession) shall pass to the right holder in 
case of the termination of the contract of the commercial concession short of the term, unless he refuses to 
assume the rights and obligations under this contract. This rules shall be applied accordingly in case of 
the cancellation of the contract of the commercial concession, concluded without reference to a definite 
term. 
4. The user shall bear subsidiary liability for the harm done to the right holder by the actions of the 
second users, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of the commercial concession. 
5. The rules for the contracts of the commercial concession, specified by this Chapter shall be 
applied to the contracts of the commercial subconcession, unless the contrary follows from the specificity 
of the subconcession. 
Article 1030. Remuneration under the Contract of the Commercial Concession 
Remuneration under the contract of the commercial concession may be paid by the user to the right 
holder in the form of fixed non-recurrent and periodical payments, deductions from proceeds, markups on 
the wholesale price of goods given by the right holder for resale, or in other form stipulated by the 
contract. 
Article 1031. The Obligations of the Right Holder 
1. The right holder shall be obliged: 
to transfer technical and commercial documentation to its user and provide other information needed 
by the user for the exercise of the rights, granted to him under the contract of the commercial concession, 
and also to brief the use and its workers on the matters connected with these rights; 
to issue contract-based licenses to the user by formalizing them in the statutory manner. 
2. Unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of the commercial concession, the right holder shall 
be obliged: 
to ensure the registration of the contract of the commercial concession (Item 2 of Article 1028); 
to render contract technical and consultative assistance for the user, including assistance in the 
training and upgrading the skill of workers; 
to control the quality of goods (works and services), produced (performed and rendered) by the user 
on the basis of the contract of the commercial concession. 
Article 1032. The User's Obligations 
With account of the nature and specificity of the activity carried on by the user under the contract of 
the commercial concession the user shall be obliged: 
to use the firm's name and/or the commercial designation of the right holder in the way indicated by 
the contract during the activity stipulated by the contract; 
to ensure the compliance of the quality of goods, produced by him on the basis of the contract, of 
the works performed and the services rendered, with the quality of similar goods, works and services, 
produced, performed or rendered directly by the right holder; 
to observe the instructions and directions of the right holder, intended for the compliance of the 
nature, methods and conditions of the use of the complex of exclusive rights with the way it is used by the 
right holder, including the directions regarding the external and internal design of commercial premises, 
used by the user in the exercise of the rights granted to him by the contract; 
to render to the buyer (customer) all the additional services which they could expect by acquiring 
(ordering) goods (works, services) directly from the right holder; 
not to divulge the right holder's secrets of production and other confidential commercial information 
received from him; 
to grant the specified number of subconcessions, if such obligation is provided for by the contract; 
to inform the buyers (customers) by the most patent method that he uses the firm's name, the 
commercial designation, trademark, service mark or any other means of individualization of virtue of the 
contract of the commercial concession. 
Article 1033. The Restrictions on the Rights of the Parties to the Contract of 
the Commercial Concession 
1. The contract of the commercial concession may provide for the restrictions on the rights of the 
parties to this contract, in particular may provide for the following: 
the obligation of the right holder not to provide other persons with similar complexes of exclusive 
rights for their use on the territory assigned to the user or to refrain from his own similar activity on this 
territory; 
the obligation of the user not to compete with the right holder on the territory to which the contract 
of the commercial concession extends in terms of business activity carried out by the user with the use of 
the exclusive rights belonging to the right holder; 
the refusal of the user to receive under contracts of the commercial concession similar rights from 
the competitors (potential competitors) of the right holder; 
the obligation of the user to get agreement with the right holder on the place of location of 
commercial premises to be used in the exercise of the exclusive rights granted under the contract, and also 
on their external and internal design. 
Restrictive conditions may be recognized as invalid on the demand of the antimonopoly body or any 
other interested person, if these conditions contradict the antimonopoly legislation in the light of the 
market conditions and the economic position of the parties. 
2. The conditions restricting the rights of the parties to the contract of the commercial concession 
shall be void, if: 
the right holder has the right to determine the price of the sale of goods by the user or the price of 
works (services), performed (rendered) by the user or to fix the upper or lower limit of these prices; 
the user has the right to sell goods, perform works or render services for the exclusively definite 
category of buyers (customers) or exclusively for the buyers (customers) who have their place of location 
(place of residence) on the territory defined by the contract. 
Article 1034. The right Holder's Liability for Claims Presented to the User 
The right holder shall bear subsidiary liability for the claims made to the user for the inconsistency 
of the quality of goods (works, services), sold (performed or rendered) by the user under the contract of 
the commercial concession. 
Against the claims made to the user as the manufacture of the products (goods) of the right holder, 
the latter shall be liable jointly with the user. 
Article 1035. The User's Right to Conclude a Contract of the Commercial 
Concession for a New Term 
1. The user who has discharged his obligations properly shall have the right to conclude a contract 
for a new term on the same conditions upon the expiry of the validity term of the contract of the 
commercial concession. 
2. The right holder shall have the right to refuse to conclude a contract of the commercial 
concession for a new term, provided that during three years since the expiry of the validity of this contract 
he will not conclude with other persons similar contracts of the commercial concession and give his 
consent to the conclusion of analogous contracts of the commercial subconcession, the operation of which 
will extend to the same territory on which the discontinued contract operated. If before the expiry of the 
three-year period the right holder wished to grant to anybody the same rights which had been granted to 
the user under the discontinued contract, he shall be obliged to offer the user the conclusion of a new 
contract or to reimburse the losses sustained by him. With the conclusion of the new contract its terms 
and conditions shall be not less favourable for the user than those of the discontinued contract. 
Article 1036. Changes in the Contract of the Commercial Concession 
A contract of the commercial concession may be changed in keeping with the rules, provided for by 
Chapter 29 of this Code. 
In their relations with third persons the parties to the contract of the commercial concession shall 
have the right to refer to changes in the contract only since the time of registration of these changes in the 
procedure, stipulated by Item 2 of Article 1028 of this Code, unless they prove that a third person knew or 
should have known about the earlier change of the contract. 
Article 1037. The Termination of the Contract of the Commercial Concession 
1. Each party to the contract of the commercial concession, concluded without reference of its 
validity term, shall have the right to abandon the contract at any time by notifying about this the other 
party six months in advance, unless the contract provides for a longer period. 
2. The anticipatory cancellation of a contract of the commercial concession, concluded with the 
reference to its validity term, and also the cancellation of a contract, concluded without reference to its 
validity term, shall be subject to registration the procedure, established by Item 2 of Article 1028 of this 
Code. 
3. In case of the cessation of the right holder's right to the firm's name and the commercial 
designation without the replacement of them by new similar rights the contract of the commercial 
concession shall cease to operate. 
4. When the right holder or the user is declared to be insolvent (bankrupt), the contract of the 
commercial concession shall cease to operate. 
Article 1038. The Validity of the Contract of the Commercial Concession in 
Case of the Change of the Parties 
1. The transfer to another person of any exclusive right, included in the complex of exclusive rights 
given to the user, shall not be a ground for changing or dissolving the contract of the commercial 
concession. A new right holder shall become a party to this contract in respect of the rights and 
obligations relating to the transferred exclusive right. 
2. In the event of the death of a right holder his rights and obligations under the contract of the 
commercial concession shall pass to his heir, provided that he has been registered or during six months 
since the opening of inheritance gets registered as an individual businessman. Otherwise the contract shall 
cease to operate. 
The rights of the deceased right holder and his obligations shall be accordingly exercised and 
discharged by the administrator appointed by the respective notary before his heir assumes these rights 
and obligations or before the heir is registered as an individual businessman. 
Article 1039. The Consequences of the Change of the Firm's Name or the 
Commercial Designation of the Right Holder 
In case of the change by the right holder of his firm's name or commercial designation, the rights to 
the use of which are a part of the complex of exclusive rights, the contract of the commercial concession 
shall be valid with regard to the new firm's name or commercial designation of the right holder, unless the 
user demands the dissolution of the contract and the reimbursement for damages. If the contract continues 
to operate, the user shall have the right to demand a proportionate reduction of the remuneration due to 
the right holder. 
Article 1040. The Consequences of the Termination of the Exclusive Right the 
Enjoyment of Which Is Granted by the Contract of the Commercial Concession 
If during the validity term of the contract of the commercial concession the validity term of the 
exclusive right under this contract has expired or such right has ceased to operate an another ground, the 
contract of the commercial concession shall be valid as before, with the exception of the provisions 
relating to the discontinued right, while the user, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract, shall have 
the right to demand a proportionate reduction of the remuneration due to the right holder. 
If the rights to the firm's name or the commercial designation belonging to the right holder cease to 
exist, the consequences, provided for by Item 2 of Article 1037 and Article 1039 of this Code, shall occur. 
Chapter 55. Particular Partnership 
Article 1041. The Contract of Particular Partnership 
1. Under the contract of particular partnership (contract for joint activity) two or several persons 
(partners) shall undertake to pool their contributions and to act jointly without forming a legal entity for 
the deriving of profit of for the attaining another goal not inconsistent with the law. 
2. Only individual businessmen and/or profit-making organizations may be the parties to the 
contract of particular partnership. 
Article 1042. Contributions by Partners 
1. All that is contributed to the common cause, including money, other assets, professional and other 
knowledge, experience and skills, and also business standing and business contracts, shall be recognized 
as the contributions of the partners. 
2. The contributions of partners shall be equal in value, unless the contrary follows from the contract 
of particular partnership of from actual circumstances. A monetary estimation of the partners's 
contribution shall be carried out by agreement between the partners. 
Article 1043. The Joint Assets of Partners 
1. The assets contributed by partners and owned by them by right of property, and also products 
manufactured as a result of their joint activity shall be recognized as their common property in shares, 
unless otherwise stipulated by the law or the contract of particular partnership or unless the contrary 
follows from the substance of the obligation. 
The assets owned by hem on the grounds different from the right of property and contributed by the 
partners shall be used in the interests of all the partners and comprise the common property of the partners 
in addition to the assets held in their common ownership. 
2. The accounting of the common property of the partners may be entrusted by them to one of the 
legal entities which participate in the contract of particular partnership. 
3. The common property of the partners shall be used by their common agreement, and in case of 
disagreement it shall be used in the order prescribed by a court of law. 
4. The obligations of the partners to maintain their common property and the procedure for the 
reimbursement of expenses relating to the discharge of these obligations shall be determined by the 
contract of particular partnership. 
Article 1044. The Conduct of the Common Affairs of Partners 
1. In the conduct of their common affairs each partner shall have the right to act on behalf of all the 
partners, unless the contract of particular partnership stipulates otherwise that the affairs are conducted by 
particular partners or jointly by all the participants in the contract of particular partnership. 
The consent of all the partners shall be required for the completion of each transaction in case of the 
joint conduct of their affairs. 
2. In relations with third persons the power of a partner to conclude deals on behalf of all the 
partners shall be certified with the power of attorney, issued to him by the other partners or with the 
contract of particular partnership, concluded in written form. 
3. In relations with third persons the partners may not refer to the restriction of the rights of the 
partner who has completed the transaction in the conduct of the common affairs of the partners, except for 
the cases where they will prove that at the time of concluding the transaction the third person knew or 
should have known about such transactions. 
4. A partner who has made on behalf of all the partners transactions in respect of which his right to 
conduct the common affairs of the partners was restricted may demand the reparation of the expenses 
incurred by him at his own expense, if there are sufficient grounds to believe that these transactions were 
necessary in the interests of all the partners. Partners who have incurred losses in consequence of such 
transactions shall have the right to demand their damages. 
5. Decisions affecting the common affairs of the partners shall be taken by the partners by common 
agreement, unless otherwise stipulated by the contract of particular partnership. 
Article 1045. The Right of a Partner to Information 
Every partner shall have the right to get acquainted with all the documents relating to the conduct of 
affairs regardless of the fact whether is empowered to conduct the common affairs of the partners. The 
abandonment of this right or its restriction, including by agreement between the parties, shall be void. 
Article 1046. Common Expenses and Losses of Partners 
Procedure for the meeting of expenses and the compensation for losses incurred in the joint activity 
of the partners shall be determined by their agreement. In the absence of such agreement each partner 
shall bear expenses and losses in proportion to the value of his contribution to the common cause. 
Any agreement which fully releases any partner from the participation in the meeting of common 
expenses or the compensation for losses shall be void. 
Article 1047. The Liability of the Partners Under Common Obligations 
1. If a contract of particular partnership is not associated with the business activity of its 
participants, each partner shall be liable for the common contractual obligations within all their property 
in proportion to the value of his contribution to the common cause. 
The partners shall be liable jointly for the common obligations arising not from the contract. 
2. If a contract of particular partnership is associated with business activity of its participants, the 
partners shall be liable jointly within all the common liabilities, regardless of the grounds for their 
appearance. 
Article 1048. The Distribution of Profit 
Profit received by the partners as a result of their joint activity shall be distributed in proportion to 
the value of the contributions made by the partners to the common cause, unless otherwise stipulated by 
the contract of particular partnership or by other agreement of the partners. Any agreement on the 
elimination of any partner from profit sharing shall be void. 
Article 1049. The Allotment of a Partner's Share on the Demand of His 
Creditor 
The creditor of a participant in the contract of particular partnership shall have the right to allot his 
share in the common property in accordance with Article 255 of this Code. 
Article 1050. The Termination of the Contract of Particular Partnership 
1. The contract of particular partnership shall be terminated in consequence of: 
the declaration of any partner as legally unfit, specially incapable or missing, unless the contract of 
particular partnership or the subsequent agreement provides for the conservation of the contract in 
relations between the other partners; 
the declaration of any partner as insolvent (bankrupt) with the exception indicated in the second 
paragraph of this Item; 
the death of a partner or the liquidation, or the reorganization of the legal entity that participates in 
the contract of particular partnership, unless the contract or the subsequent agreement provides for the 
conservation of the contract in the relations between the other partners or for the replacement of the 
deceased partner (liquidated or reorganized legal entity) by his heirs (legal successors); 
the refusal of any partner to take further part in the contract of unlimited duration with the 
exception, indicated in the second paragraph of this Item; 
the dissolution of the contract of particular partnership, concluded with reference to a definite 
validity term on the demand of one partner in the relations between him and other partners with the 
exception, indicated in the second paragraph of this Item; 
the expiry of the validity term of the contract of particular partnership; 
the allotment of a partner's share on the demand of his creditor with the exception, indicated in the 
second paragraph of this Item. 
2. With the termination of a contract of particular partnership the things, transferred for common 
possession and/or use of the partners, shall be returned to the partners who have contributed them free of 
charge, unless otherwise stipulated by the agreement of the parties. 
Since the time of the termination of a contract of particular partnership, its participants shall bear 
joint liability in case of default on the common obligations with regard to third persons. 
The partition of the property held in the common ownership of the partners and of the common 
rights of claim which have arisen for them shall be effected in the order, prescribed by Article 252 of this 
Code. 
A partner who has contributed an individual thing shall have the right to demand in court the return 
of this thing to him with the termination of the contract of particular partnership subject to the observance 
of the interests of the other partners and creditors. 
Article 1051. The Abandonment of the Contract of Particular Partnership of 
Unlimited Duration 
A statement on the partner's abandonment of the contract of particular partnership of unlimited 
duration shall be made by him at least before three months before the supposed withdrawal from the 
contract. 
Any agreement on the limitation of the right to abandon the contract of unlimited duration shall be 
void. 
Article 1052. The Cancellation of the Contract of Particular Partnership on the 
Demand of a Party Thereto 
In addition to the grounds, indicated in Item 2 of Article 450 of this Code a party to the contract of 
particular partnership, concluded with reference to its validity term or the goal as a revocable proviso, 
shall have the right to demand the cancellation of the contract in relations between himself and the other 
partners for valid reasons with the compensation for the real damage inflicted on the other partners by the 
dissolution of the contract. 
Article 1053. The Liability of the Partner in Respect of Whom the Contract of 
Particular Partnership Has Been Dissolved 
In case where a contract of particular partnership has not been terminated as a result of the statement 
by any participant on the refusal to continue his participation in it or of the dissolution of the contract on 
the demand of one partner, the person whose participation in the contract has ceased shall be liable to 
third persons under the common obligations that have arisen during his participation in the contract, as if 
he remained as a participant in the contract of particular partnership. 
Article 1054. Private Partnership 
1. The contract of particular partnership may provide for the non-disclosure of its existence for third 
parties (private partnership). The rules for the contracts of particular partnership, provided for by this 
Chapter, shall be applicable to such unofficial contract, unless otherwise stipulated by the Article or 
unless the contrary follows from the private partnership. 
2. In relations with third persons each participant of the private partnership shall be liable for all his 
property in the transactions he has concluded on his own behalf in the common interests of the partners. 
3. In relations between the partners the obligations which have arisen during their joint activity shall 
be regarded as common. 
Chapter 56. Public Promise of a Reward 
Article 1055. The Obligation to Pay a Reward 
1. A person who has announced in public the payment of a pecuniary remuneration or the issue of a 
different reward (payment of a reward) to the person who will perform the lawful action, indicated in the 
announcement within the period mentioned by it, shall be obliged to pay the promised reward to anybody 
who has committed the relevant action, in particular found out the lost thing or provided the person who 
announced the issue of the reward with the necessary information. 
2. The obligation to pay a reward shall originate, provided that the promise of a reward makes it 
possible to ascertain the person who has given the promise. The person who has responded to the promise 
shall have the right to demand the written confirmation of this promise and shall bear the risk of 
consequences of the non-presentation of this demand, if it transpires that in actual fact the announcement 
of the reward has not been made by the person indicated in it. 
3. If the public promise of a reward has not indicated its amount, the latter shall be defined by 
agreement with the person who has promised the reward and by a court of law in case of a dispute. 
4. The obligation to pay a reward shall arise, regardless of the fact whether an appropriate action in 
connection with the announcement or beside it. 
5. In cases where the action indicated in the announcement has been committed by several persons, 
the right to the receipt of a reward shall be acquired by those of them who made the relevant action first. 
If the action indicated in the announcement has been committed by two or more persons and it is 
impossible to ascertain who of them has made the action first, and also in case where the action has been 
committed by two or more persons simultaneously, the reward shall be divided between them in equal 
shares or in a different amount, envisaged by the agreement between them. 
6. Unless the announcement of a reward provides for otherwise and unless the contrary follows from 
the character of the action, indicated in it, the compliance of the performed action with the requirements 
of the announcement shall be determined by the person who has promised the reward in public and by a 
court of law in case of a dispute. 
Article 1056. The Revocation of the Public Promise of a Reward 
1. A person who has announced in public the payment of a reward shall have the right in the same 
form the repudiate his promise, except for the cases where the announcement itself provides for the 
inadmissibility of repudiation or the latter follows from it or fixes a definite date for the performance of 
the action for which the reward has been promised, or where by the time of the announcement about the 
repudiation one or several responded persons had already committed the action indicated in the 
announcement. 
2. The revocation of the public promise of a reward shall not release the person who has announced 
the reward from the reimbursement of the responded persons' expenses, incurred by them in connection 
with the performance of the action, indicated in the announcement, within the limits of the reward 
referred to in the announcement. 
Chapter 57. Public Competition 
Article 1057. The Organization of a Public Competition 
1. A person who has announced in public the payment of a pecuniary remuneration or the issue of a 
different reward (the payment of a reward) for the best performance of work or the achievement of other 
results (public competition) shall pay (issue) the stipulated reward to the person who has been recognized 
as its winner in keeping with the terms of holding the competition. 
2. A public competition shall be aimed at the attainment of some socially useful objectives. 
3. A public competition may be open, when the offer of the competition organizer for the 
participation in it is addressed to all those who desire to take part by announcing in the press or other 
mass media, or may be closed, when the offer for the participation in the competition is sent to a definite 
range of persons at the option of the competition organizer. 
An open competition may be stipulated by the preliminary qualification of its participants at a time 
when the competition organizer holds a preliminary selection of the persons who desire to take part in it. 
4. An announcement of a public competition shall contain at least the conditions providing for the 
substance of an assignment, the criteria and procedure for the appraisal of the results of work or any other 
achievements, the place, period of time and procedure for their presentation, the amount and form of 
rewards, and also the procedure and date of announcing the results of the competition. 
5. The rules, provided for by this Chapter, shall be applicable to public competitions containing the 
obligation of concluding with the competition winner a contract inasmuch as Articles 447-449 of this 
Code do not stipulate otherwise. 
Article 1058. Changes in the Terms of a Public Competition and Its 
Revocation 
1. A person who has announced a public competition shall have the right to change its terms or to 
revoke it only during the first half of the period of time fixed for the presentation of works. 
2. A notice about changes in the terms of the competition or its revocation shall be made by the 
same method of announcing the competition. 
3. In cases of changes in the terms of the competition or its revocation the person who has 
announced the competition shall have the right to reimburse the expenses incurred by any person who has 
performed the work, envisaged in the announcement before he knew or should have known about the 
changes on the terms of the competition and about its revocation. 
A person who has announced the competition shall be released from the obligation of reimbursing 
the expenses, if he proves that the work has been fulfilled not in connection with the competition, in 
particular before the announcement of the competition or when obviously the work has not complied with 
the competition terms. 
4. If the requirements, referred to in Items 1 or 2 of this Article have been violated in case of 
changing the terms of the competition or of its revocation, the person who has announced the competition 
shall be obliged to pay the reward to those who fulfilled the work that satisfies the terms indicated in the 
announcement. 
Article 1059. The Decision on the Payment of a Reward 
1. A decision on the payment of a reward shall be passed and communicated to the public 
competition participants in the procedure and in the period of time fixed by the announcement of the 
competition. 
2. If the results, referred to in the announcement, have been achieved in the work performed jointly 
by two or more persons, the reward shall be distributed in keeping with the agreement reached by them. If 
such agreement is not achieved, the procedure for the distribution of the reward shall be determined by a 
court of law. 
Article 1060. The Use of the Works of Science, Literature and Art Awarded 
with Rewards 
If the creation of a work of science, literature or art makes up the subject of a public competition and 
unless its terms provide for otherwise, the person who has announced the public competition shall acquire 
the preferential right to he conclusion with the author of the rewarded work of a contract for the use of the 
work and to the reception of relevant remuneration for it. 
Article 1061. The Return of the Works to the Participants in a Public 
Competition 
A person who has announced the public competition shall be obliged to return to the competition 
participants the works not awarded with rewards, unless otherwise stipulated by the announcement of he 
competition and unless the contrary follows from the nature of the performed work. 
Chapter 58. Gaming and Betting 
In accordance to Ruling of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation No. 282-O of 
December 16, 2002, Article 1062 does not serve as an obstacle to the provision of judicial defence for 
the claims following from the forward contract-if by its substance it meets the civil law criteria of 
transactions claims under which shall be subject to defence in court procedure  
Article 1062. Claims Associated with the Organization of Games and Bets and 
the Participation in Them 
The claims of individuals and legal entities, associated with the organization of games and bets or 
the participation in them, shall not be subject to judicial remedy with the exception of the claims of the 
persons who have taken part in games or bets under the influence of the fraud, violence, threat or 
malicious agreement of their representative with the organizer of games or bets, and also of the claims, 
referred to in Item 5 of Article 1063 of this Code. 
Federal Law No. 138-FZ of November 11, 2003 amended Article 1063 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 1063. The Holding of Lotteries, Totalizators and Other Games by State 
and Municipal Bodies or With Their Permit 
1. Relations between the organizers of lotteries, totalizators (mutual bets) and of other games based 
on risk - the Russian Federation, the subjects of the Russian Federation, the municipal bodies, the persons 
and for lotteries, by legal entities, who received a right to conduct such games in the procedure 
established by a law from the authorized state and municipal body - and the participants in games shall be 
based on the agreement. 
2. In cases provided for by the rules for the organization of games, the agreement between the 
organizer and the participant in games shall be formalized by the issue of a lottery ticket, receipt or any 
other document, and also otherwise. 
3. The offer on the conclusion of an agreement, stipulated by Item 1 of this Article, shall include the 
clauses on the period of holding games and the procedure for determining prizes and their amounts. 
In case where the organizer of games refuses to hold them within the fixed period of time the 
participants in games shall have the right to demand that their organizer should recover the real damage 
sustained as a result of the revocation of games or of the postponement of the date of the real damage. 
4. Persons who in keeping with the terms of holding a lottery, totalizator or other games are 
recognized as those who have won them shall be paid out by the organizer of games the prizes in the 
amounts stipulated by the terms of their holding (in monetary terms or in kind) and on due date, and if the 
date is not indicated in these terms - within 10 days since the time of determining the results of the games 
or within another term established by a law. 
5. In case of default by the organizer of games on the obligation, indicated in Item 4 of this Article, 
the participant who has won in the lottery or totalizator or any other games shall have the right to demand 
that the organizer of games should pay off the prize and also to reimburse the losses caused by the breach 
of the contract by the organizer. 
Chapter 59. Liabilities for Damage 
See Provisional Methodology of Estimating the Extent of Damage (Losses) Caused by Breaches of 
Economic Contracts given by Letter of the State Arbitration of the USSR No. S-12/NA-225 of December 
28, 1990 
_ 1. General Provisions in the Redress of Injury 
Article 1064. General Grounds for Liability for Damage 
1. The injury inflicted on the personality or property of an individual, and also the damage done to 
the property of a legal entity shall be subject to full compensation by the person who inflicted the damage. 
The obligation to redress the injury may be imposed by the law on the person who is not the inflictor 
of injury. 
The law or the contract may institute the obligation of the inflictor of injury to repay to the victims 
compensation over and above the compensation of damage. 
2. A person who has caused harm shall be released from the redress of injury, if he proves that 
injury was caused no through his fault. The law may also provide for the redress of injury in the absence 
of the fault of the inflictor of injury. 
3. Injury inflicted by lawful actions shall be subject to redress in cases, provided for by the law. 
Redress of injury may be rejected, if injury has been caused at the request or with the consent of the 
insured person and unless the actions of the inflictor of injury violate the moral principles of the society. 
Article 1065. Prevention of the Infliction of Injury 
1. The damage of the infliction of injury in future may be a ground for the action for the prohibition 
of the activity that creates such danger. 
2. If the injury caused is the consequence of the operation of an enterprise, structure or of any other 
production activity which continues to inflict injuries or threatens with a new damage, the court of law 
shall have the right to bound the defendant to suspend or stop the relevant activity in addition to the 
redress of injury. 
The court may dismiss the action for the suspension or discontinuance of the relevant activity only 
in case, if its suspension or discontinuance contradicts public interests. The dismissal of the action for the 
suspension or discontinuance of such activity shall not deprive the insured party of the right to the redress 
of the injury inflicted by this activity. 
Article 1066. The Infliction of Injury in the State of Justifiable Defence 
Injury inflicted in the state of justifiable defence, unless the requirements of justifiable defence are 
exceeded, shall not be subject to redress. 
Article 1067. The Infliction of Injury in the State of Absolute Necessity 
Injury inflicted in the state of absolute necessity, that is for the removal of danger threatening the 
inflictor of injury himself or other persons, if this danger could not be eliminated under the given 
circumstances with other means, shall be redressed by the person who has caused this injury. 
Taking into account the circumstances under which such injury was inflicted, the court of law may 
impose the obligation of its redress on a third person, in whose interest the inflictor of injury acted, or 
release this third person and the inflictor of injury from the redress of this injury in full or in part. 
Article 1068. The Liability of a Legal Entity or an Individual for Injury 
Inflicted by the Employee 
1. A legal entity or an individual shall redress the injury inflicted by the employee during the 
performance of labour (official) duties. 
In terms of the rules, provided for by this Chapter, individuals performing their work on the basis of 
a labour contract, and also individuals performing their work under a civil-law contract shall be 
recognized as employees, if in this case they acted or should have acted on the assignment of the relevant 
legal entity or individual and under their control over the safe conduct of works. 
2. Economic partnerships and procedure cooperatives shall refresh the injury inflicted by their 
participants (members) during the performance by them of the business, production or any other activity 
of the partnership or cooperative. 
Article 1069. Liability for the Injury Inflicted by State and Local Self
government Bodies, and Also by Their Officials 
The injury inflicted on an individual or a legal entity as a result of unlawful actions (inaction) of 
state and local self-government bodies or of their officials, including as a result of the issuance of an act 
of a state or self-government body inconsistent with the law or any other legal act, shall be subject to 
redress. The injury shall be redressed at the expense of the state treasury of the Russian Federation, the 
respective subject of the Russian Federation or the respective municipal body, as the case may be. 
Article 1070. Liability for the Injury Inflicted by the Illegal Actions of the 
Bodies of Inquest, Preliminary Investigation, the Procurator's Office and the Court of 
Law 
Federal Law No. 45-FZ of May 9, 2005 amended Item 1 of Article 1070 of this Code. The amendments 
shall enter into force upon the expiry of ninety days from the official publication of said Federal Law  
See the previous text of the Item 
1. The injury inflicted on an individual as a result of illegal conviction, illegal institution of 
proceedings on criminal charges, illegal application of remand in custody as a measure of suppression or 
of a written understanding not to leave one's place of residence, of illegally taking to administrative 
responsibility in the form of administrative arrest, as well as the damage inflicted upon a legal entity as a 
result of illegally taking to administrative responsibility in the form of an administrative suspension of the 
activity shall be redressed in full at the expense of the state treasury of the Russian Federation and in 
cases, stipulated by law, at the expense of the state treasury of the respective subject of the Russian 
Federation or of the respective municipal body, regardless of the fault of the officials of bodies of inquest, 
preliminary investigation, procurator's offices or courts of law in the procedure established by law. 
Decision of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation no. 1-p of January 25, 2001 
considered the provision contained in Item 2 of Article 1070 of this Code, in its constitutional and legal 
meaning exposed in the present Decision and in the interrelation with Articles 6 and 41 of the 
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, may not serve as a 
ground for refusal to compensate by the State the damage caused during administrative court 
proceedings in other cases (namely, when a dispute is not settled on its merits) as a result of unlawful 
actions (or omission to act) of a court (a judge), including cases of violation of reasonable terms of 
court proceedings, if the guilt of a judge is established not by a court sentence but by some other 
appropriate court decision, as not contradicting the Constitution of the Russian Federation  
2. Injury inflicted on an individual or a legal entity as a result of the illegal activity of bodies of 
inquest, preliminary investigation, procurator's offices, which has not entailed the consequences, specified 
by Item 1 of this Article, shall be redressed on the grounds and in the procedure, provided for by Article 
1069 of this Code. Injury inflicted during the administration of justice shall be redressed in cases, if the 
fault of a judge has been established by the court's judgement that has entered into legal force. 
Article 1071. Bodies and Persons Acting on Behalf of the State Treasury in 
Case of Redress of Injury at Its Expense 
I cases where in keeping with this Code or other laws in injury inflicted is subject to redress at the 
expense of state treasury of the Russian Federation, that of the subject of the Russian Federation or the 
municipal formation, the state treasury shall be represented by the relevant finance bodies, unless in 
accordance with Item 3 of Article 125 of this Code this duty is imposed on a different body, legal entity 
or an individual. 
Article 1072. Redress of Injury by the Person Who Has Insured His Liability 
A legal entity or an individual who has insured their liability by way of voluntary or obligatory 
insurance in favour of the injured party (Article 931 and Item 1 of Article 935), when insurance 
compensation is not sufficient to redress the inflicted injury, shall compensate for the difference between 
the insurance compensation and the actual injury. 
Article 1073. Liability for the Injury Inflicted by Minors at the Age Before 14 
Years 
1. Parents (adopters) or guardians shall be liable for the injury inflicted by minors who have not 
reached 14 years of age, unless they prove that the injury has been inflicted not through their fault. 
2. If a minor who in need of guardianship was in the respective educational or medical institution, 
social protection establishment or in any other similar institution, which by dint of law is its guardian 
(Article 35), this institution shall be obliged to redress the injury inflicted by the minor, unless it proves 
that this injury has been inflicted not through the institution's fault. 
3. If a minor has inflicted injury at a time when he was under the supervision of the educational, 
medical or other institution which is duty-bound to exercise supervision over the minor or of the person 
who has exercised supervision on the basis of a contract, this institution or this person shall be liable for 
the injury, unless they prove that the injury has been inflicted not through their fault during the exercise of 
supervision. 
4. The obligation of parents (adopters), guardians, educational, medical and other institutions in the 
redress of the injury inflicted by a minor shall not be discontinued with the attainment by the minor of 
majority or with the receipt by him of property sufficient to redress the injury. 
If parents (adopters), guardians or other private persons, referred to in Item 3 of this Article, have 
died or do not have sufficient pecuniary means to redress the injury inflicted on the life or health of the 
injured person, and the inflictor of injury who has acquired a legal capacity in full possesses such means, 
the court of law shall have the right to take a decision on the redress of the injury in full or in part at the 
expense of the inflictor of the injury by taking into account the property status of the injured person and 
the inflictor of the injury, and also other circumstances. 
Article 1074. Liability for the Injury Inflicted by Minors at the Age From 14 to 
18 Years 
1. Minors at the age from 14 to 18 years shall bear liability for the inflicted injury on general 
grounds. 
2. In case where a minor at the age from 14 to 18 years has no income or other property sufficient to 
redress injury the latter shall be redressed in full or in the lacking part by his parents (adopters) or the 
guardian, unless they prove that the injury has been inflicted not through their fault. 
If a minor at the age from 14 to 18 years who is need of custody was placed in the respective 
educational or medical establishment, social protection institution or any other similar institution, which 
by dint of law is his guardian (Article 35), this institution shall be obliged to redress the injury in full or in 
the lacking part, unless it proves that the injury has been inflicted not through its fault. 
3. The obligation of parents (adopters), the guardian and the respective institution to redress the 
injury inflicted by a minor at the age from 14 to 18 years shall cease upon the attainment of majority by 
the inflictor of injury in cases where before the attainment of majority he acquired income or other 
property, which are sufficient to redress the injury, or where he acquired legal capacity before the 
attainment of majority. 
Article 1075. Liability of Parents Deprived in Parental Rights for the Injury 
Inflicted by Minors 
The court of law may impose liability for the injury inflicted by a minor on his parent during three 
years after the parent was deprived of his parental rights, if the child's behaviour that entailed the 
infliction of injury had been the result of the improper exercise of parental duties. 
Article 1076. Liability for the Injury Inflicted by the Individual Recognized as 
Legally Unfit 
1. The injury inflicted by the individual recognized as legally unfit shall be redressed by his 
guardian or the organization which is duty-bound to exercise supervision over him, unless they prove that 
the injury has been inflicted not through their fault. 
2. The obligation of the guardian or the organization which is duty-bound to exercise supervision 
over the redress of the injury inflicted by the individual, recognized as legally unfit, shall not cease in 
case of the subsequent recognition of him as having a legal capacity. 
3. If the guardian has died or has not sufficient pecuniary means to redress the injury inflicted on the 
life or health of the injured person, and the inflictor of the injury possesses such means, the court of law 
shall have the right to take a decision on the redress of the injury in full or in part at the expense of the 
inflictor of the injury by taking into account the property status of the injured party and the inflictor of the 
injury. 
Article 1077. Liability for the Injury Inflicted by the Individual Recognized as 
Having Limited Legal Capacity 
Injury inflicted by the individual with limited legal capacity in consequence of the abuse of 
alcoholic drinks or narcotics shall be redressed by the inflictor of injury himself. 
Article 1078. Liability for the Injury Inflicted by the Individual Who Is 
Incapable of Understanding the Significance of His Actions 
1. An individual with a legal capacity or a minor at the age from 14 to 18 years who has inflicted 
injury in a state when he could not understand the significance of his actions or guide them shall not be 
liable for the injury inflicted by him. 
If injury is inflicted on the life or health of the injured person, the court of law may impose the duty 
of redressing the injury in full or in part on the inflictor of injury by taking into account the property 
status of the injured party and the inflictor of injury, and also other circumstances. 
2. The inflictor of injury shall not be released from liability, if he has brought himself in a state in 
which he could not understand the significance of his actions or guide them by the abuse of alcoholic 
drinks, narcotics or by any other method. 
3. If injury is inflicted by the person who could not understand the significance of his actions or 
guide them in consequence of his psychic disorder, the court of law may impose the duty in redressing 
injury on the above-bodied spouse, parents, and children of age who have known about the psychic 
disorder of the inflictor of injury but failed to raise the question about the recognition of this person as 
legally unfit. 
Article 1079. Liability for the Injury Inflicted by the Activity with Increased 
Hazard for People Around 
1. Legal entities and individuals whose activity is associated with increased hazard for people 
around (the use of transport vehicles, mechanisms, high voltage electric power, atomic power, explosives, 
potent poisons, etc.; building and other related activity, etc.) shall be obliged to redress the injury inflicted 
by a source of special danger, unless they prove that injury has been inflicted in consequence of force 
majeure or the intent of the injured person. The owner of a source of special danger may be released by 
the court from liability in full or in part also on the grounds, provided for by Items 2 and 3 of Article 1083 
of this Code. 
The obligation of redressing injury shall be imposed on the legal entity or the individual who 
possess the source of special danger by right of ownership, the right of economic or operative 
management or on any other lawful ground (by right of lease, by procuration for the right to drive a 
transport vehicle, by decision of the corresponding body on the transfer of the source of special danger, 
etc.). 
2. The owner of a source of special danger shall not be liable for the injury inflicted by this source, 
if he proves that the source has retired from his possession as a result of the illegal actions of other 
persons. In such cases liability for the injury inflicted by the source of special danger shall be borne by 
the persons who have acquired the source contrary to law. If the owner of the source of special danger is 
guilty of the withdrawal of this source from his possession contrary to law, liability may be imposed both 
the owner and on the person who has acquired the source of special danger contrary to law. 
3. The owners of sources of special danger shall bear joint liability for the injury inflicted as a result 
of the interaction of these sources (the collusion of transport vehicles, etc.) to third persons on the 
grounds, provided for by Item 1 of this Article. 
Injury inflicted as a result of the interaction of the sources of special danger to their owners shall be 
redressed on general grounds (Article 1064). 
Article 1080. Liability for the Injury Jointly Inflicted by Persons 
Persons who jointly inflicted injury shall be jointly liable to the injured party. 
In response of the application of the injured person and in his interests the court of law shall have 
the right to impose liability on the persons who jointly inflicted injury in shares by estimating them with 
reference to the rules, provided for by Item 2 of Article 1081 of this Code. 
Article 1081. The Right of Recourse to the Person Who Has Inflicted Injury 
1. A person who has redressed the injury inflicted by another person (the employee who discharges 
official or other labour duties, the person who drives a transport vehicle, etc.) shall have the right to 
recourse to this person in the amount of the paid compensation, unless the law establishes a different 
amount of compensation. 
2. The inflictor of injury who has redressed the injury jointly with others shall have the right to 
demand from each inflictor of injury the share of the compensation paid to the injured party in the amount 
that corresponds to the degree of guilt of this inflictor of injury. If it is impossible to determine the degree 
of guilt, the shares shall be recognized as equal. 
3. The Russian Federation, the respective subject of the Russian Federation or the municipal 
formation shall have the right of recourse to the official of the body of inquest, preliminary investigation, 
procurator's office or the court of law in case of redress of the injury inflicted by them (Item 1 of Article 
1070), if his guilt has been established by the court's judgement that has entered in legal force. 
4. Persons who have redressed injury on the grounds, referred to in Articles 1073-1076 of this Code 
shall have no right of recourse to the inflictor of injury. 
Article 1082. Methods of Redressing Injury 
While satisfying the claim for redressing injury, the court of law, in keeping with the circumstances 
of the case, shall bind the person responsible for the infliction of injury to redress injury in kind (to 
present a thing of the same sort and quality, to repair a damaged thing, etc.) or to recompense for the 
losses caused (Item 2 of Article 15). 
Article 1083. The Registration of the Fault of the Injured Party and the 
Property Status of the Person Who Has Inflicted Injury 
1. Injury inflicted due to the intent of the injured party shall not be redressed. 
2. If the gross negligence of the injured party himself has facilitated the emergence or increase of 
injury, the amount of compensation shall be reduced depending on the degree of the guilt of the injured 
party and the inflictor of injury. 
In the event of gross negligence on the part of the injured person and in the absence of guilt of the 
inflictor of injury in cases where his liability commences regardless of his guilt, the amount of 
compensation shall be reduced or the redress of injury may be rejected, unless the law provides for 
otherwise. If injury is inflicted on the life or health of the individual, the refusal to redress injury shall not 
be allowed. 
The fault of the injured party shall not be taken into account in case of the reimbursement of 
additional expenses (Item 1 of Article 1085), of the redress of injury in connection with the death of the 
breadwinner (Article 1089), and also in case of the compensation for the expenses on the burial (Article 
1094). 
3. The court of law may reduce the amount of compensation for the injury inflicted by an individual 
with due account of his property standing, with the exception of cases where injury has been inflicted by 
deliberate actions. 
_ 2. The Redress of the Injury Inflicted on the Life or Health 
of an Individual 
Article 1084. The Redress of the Injury Inflicted on the Life or Health of an 
Individual During the Discharge of Contractual or Other Obligations 
Injury inflicted on the life or health of an individual during the discharge of contractual obligations, 
and also during the discharge of the military duty, during the service in the militia and during the 
discharge of other appropriate duties shall be redressed according to the rules, provided for by this 
Chapter, unless the law or the contract provide for a higher degree of responsibility. 
Article 1085. The Extent and Character of the Redress of Injury Inflicted on 
the Person's Health 
1. In case of maiming an individual or of any other injury to his health compensation shall be 
extended to the earnings (income) which has been lost by the injured person and which he had or could 
definitely have, and also to the expenses incurred by injury to his health, including the expenses on 
medical treatment, additional nutrition, the acquisition of medicines, prosthesis, care by other people, the 
sanatoria and spa treatment, the acquisition of special transport vehicles, retraining, if it is found out that 
the injured person is in need of aid of these kinds and care and has not the right to receive them free of 
charge. 
2. In estimating the lost earnings (income) the disability pension, awarded to the injured person in 
connection with mutilation or any other injury to his health, and also other pensions, benefits and other 
similar payments, awarded both before and after the infliction of injury on his health, shall not be taken 
into account and shall not involve a reduction of the amount of the compensation for the injury (shall not 
be counted towards the redress of the injury). The earnings (income), received by the injured party after 
the impairment of his health, shall not be counted towards the redress of injury. 
3. The extent and amount of the redress of injury due to the injured party in keeping with this 
Article may be increased by the law or the agreement. 
Article 1086. The Estimation of the Earnings (Income) Lost as a Result of the 
Impairment of Health 
1. The amount of the earnings (income) lost by the victim and subject to compensation shall be 
determined in percentage of the average monthly earnings (income) before maiming or any other 
impairment of health or before the loss of the capacity for work, which correspond to the degree of the 
loss by the victim of his professional ability to work, and in the absence of professional ability to work - 
to the degree of the loss of general capacity for work. 
2. The lost earnings (income) of the victim shall include all types of taxable payment for his labour 
under labour and civil-law contracts in the place of his main work and in case of holding more than one 
office. Settled apart shall be lump-sum payments, in particular compensation for the non-used leave of 
absence and the retirement benefit in case of dismissal. The paid benefit shall be reckoned over the period 
of temporal physical disability or of maternity leave. Income from business activity, and also the author's 
fees shall be included in the lost earnings, with income from business being included on the basis of the 
data supplied by a tax inspection team. 
All types of earnings (income) shall be reckoned in the amounts charged before tax. 
3. The average monthly earnings (income) of the injured person shall be reckoned by dividing the 
total sum of his earnings (income) for the 12 months of work that preceded the impairment of his health 
by 12. If the victim had worked for less than 12 months by the time of the infliction of injury, the average 
monthly earnings (income) shall be reckoned by dividing the total sum of earnings (income) for the 
actually worked number of months that preceded the impairment of his health by the number of these 
months. 
The months during which he has worked not in full measure shall be replaced at the wish of the 
victim by the preceding months in which he worked in full measure or shall be excluded from the 
counting if it is impossible to replace them. 
Federal Law No. 152-FZ of November 26, 2002 amended Item 4 of Article 1086 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Item 
4. In case where the victim of injury account shall be taken at his wish of his earnings before the 
dismissal or of the usual amount of labour remuneration for the worker of his qualification in the given 
locality, but not less than the value of the subsistence level of the employable population as a whole in the 
Russian Federation established in accordance with law. 
5. If stable changes improving the property status of the victim (a rise in the wage according to the 
post held, the transfer to a high-paid job, employment after the graduation from an educational 
establishment with full-time instruction and in other cases when changes are stable and when it is possible 
to alter the payment for the victim's labour) took place before the maiming or other impairment of his 
health, account shall only betaken of the earnings (income) which he received or should have received 
after the appropriate change in case of estimating his average earnings (income). 
Federal Law No. 152-FZ of November 26, 2002 amended Article 1087 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 1087. The Redress of Injury in Case of Impairing the Health of the 
Person Who Has Not Reached Majority 
1. In case of maiming or any other injury inflicted on the health of a minor who has not reached 14 
years of age and who has not got earnings (income), the person responsible for the inflicted injury shall be 
obliged to reimburse the expenses incurred by the impairment of his health. 
2. Upon the attainment by a minor of 14 years of age, and also in the event of the infliction of injury 
on a minor from 14 to 18 years of age, who has not got earnings (income), the person responsible for the 
inflicted injury shall be obliged to redress the injury caused by the loss of, or decreased in, capacity for 
work in addition to the reimbursement of the expenses incurred by the impairment of his health by 
proceeding from the value of the subsistence level of the employable population as a whole in the Russian 
Federation established in accordance with law. 
3. If by the time of the impairment of his health a minor had earnings, the injury shall be redressed 
on the basis of their amount, but not less than the value of the subsistence level of the employable 
population as a whole in the Russian Federation established in accordance with law. 
4. After the minor begins his labour activity after the injury was inflicted on his health, he shall have 
the right to demand an increased amount of compensation for the injury on the basis of his earnings, but 
not less than the amount of labour remuneration, fixed according to the post he occupies or the earnings 
of the worker of the same qualification in the place of his work. 
Article 1088. The Redress of the Injury Inflicted on the Persons Who Have 
Suffered Damage as a Result of the Breadwinner's Death 
1. In the event of the death of the victim (breadwinner) the right to the redress of injury shall belong 
to: 
the non-able-bodied persons who were dependants of the deceased person or who had by time of his 
death the right to receive maintenance from him; 
the infant of the deceased person which was born after his death; 
one of the parents, the spouse or any other family member, regardless of his ability to work, who 
does not work and take the care for his dependent children, grandchildren, brothers and sisters who have 
not reached 14 years of age or although have reached the said age but are in need of care by other people 
because of poor health according to the finding of medical bodies; 
the persons who were dependants of the deceased person and who have become non-able-bodied 
during five years after his death. 
One of the parents, the spouse or any other family member, who does not work and takes care of the 
children, grandchildren, brothers and sisters of the deceased person and who has become non-able-bodied 
during the period of this case, shall retain the right to the referred of injury after the end of the care for 
these persons. 
2. Injury shall be redressed for the following persons: 
minors - until the attainment of 18 years of age; 
students of over 18 years of age - until the graduation of educational establishments with full-time 
instruction and at least until 23 years of age; 
women of over 55 years of age and men of over 60 years of age; 
invalids - for the time of disability; 
one of the parents, the spouse or another family member who take care of his dependent children, 
grandchildren, brothers and sisters - until the attainment by them of 14 years of age or the change in the 
state of their health. 
Article 1089. The Amount of the Redress of Injury Sustained in Case of the 
Breadwinner's Death 
1. Injury shall be redressed for the persons who have the right to the redress of injury in connection 
with the breadwinner's death in the amount of that share of the earnings (income) of the deceased person, 
determined according to the rules of Article 1086 of this Code, which they received or had the right to 
receive for his maintenance during his lifetime. In estimating compensation for the injury inflicted on 
these persons it is necessary to include in the incomes on the deceased person his pension, life 
maintenance and other such payments on a par with his earnings (income). 
2. In estimating the amount of compensation for injury the pensions awarded to the persons in 
connection with the breadwinner's death, and also other pensions awarded both before and after the 
breadwinner's death and the earnings (income) and the scholarship received by these persons shall not be 
counted towards the compensation for their injury. 
3. The amount of compensation fixed for each person who is entitled to the redress of injury in 
connection with the breadwinner's death shall not be subject to further recalculation, except for the cases 
of: 
the birth of a baby after the breadwinner's death; 
the awarding of compensation payments to the persons who take care of the children, grandchildren, 
brothers and sisters of the deceased breadwinner or their discontinuance. 
The law or the agreement may increase the amount of compensation. 
Article 1090. Subsequent Changes in the Amount of Compensation for Injury 
1. The victim who has lost his capacity for work partially shall have the right to demand at any time 
that the person entrusted with the duty of redressing injury that he should increase the amount of 
compensation accordingly, if the victim's ability to work has decreased afterwards due to the impairment 
of his health as compared with his ability to work by the time of awarding to him the compensation for 
the injury. 
2. A person who is entrusted with the duty of redressing the injury inflicted on the victim's health 
shall have the right to demand a corresponding reduction of the amount of compensation, if the victim's 
ability to work has arisen as compared with that he had by the time of awarding to him the compensation 
for the injury. 
3. The victim shall have the right to demand an increased amount of the redress of injury, if the 
person charged with the duty of redressing injury has improved his property standing, while the amount 
of compensation has been reduced in accordance with Item 3 of Article 1083 of this Code. 
4. The court of law may on the demand of the person who has inflicted injury reduce the amount of 
compensation for the injury, if his property standing has deteriorated in connection of disability or the 
attainment of the pensionable age as compared with his standing at the time of awarding compensation 
for the injury, except for the cases where injury was inflicted by deliberate actions. 
Federal Law No. 152-FZ of November 26, 2002 reworded Article 1091 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 1091. Increase of Amount of Compensation of Harm in Connection 
with Increased Cost of Living 
Amounts to be paid to citizens for compensation of harm caused to the life or health of a victim 
shall be subject, in the event of an increase in the cost of living, to indexation in the procedure established 
by law (Article 318). 
Article 1092. Payments for the Redress of Injury 
1. The redress of the injury caused by the decrease in the capacity for work or by the victim's death 
shall be effected by monthly payments. 
In the presence of valid reasons the court of law may, with due account of the possibilities of the 
inflictor of injury and on the demand of the individual who has the right to the redress of injury, adjudge 
to him the due payments in the lump, but for not more than three years. 
2. Sums of money intended for the reimbursement of additional expenses (Item 1 of Article 1085) 
may be adjudged for the future within the time-limits, defined on the basis of a medical expert 
examination, and also in case of necessity for the preliminary payment for the appropriate service and 
property, including for the acquisition of a pass to a sanatorium or holding home, the payment of fare, the 
payment for special transport vehicles. 
Article 1093. The Redress of Injury in Case of the Termination of a Legal 
Entity 
1. In the event of the reorganization of the legal entity recognized in the statutory manner as 
responsible for the injury inflicted on human life or health, the obligation to make appropriate payment 
shall be borne by its legal successor. Claims for the redress of injury shall be made to this successor. 
2. In the event of the liquidation of the legal entity, recognized in the statutory manner as 
responsible for the injury inflicted on human life or health, the appropriate payments shall be capitalized 
for their payment to the victim according to the rules, established by the law or other legal acts. 
On the capitalization of pensions and payments for injury or death which should be paid by liquidated 
enterprises see Resolusion of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR and the Council of People's 
Commissars of the USSR of November 23, 1927 
The law or other legal acts may also provide for other cases in which payments may be capitalized. 
Article 1094. The Reimbursement of Expenses on Burial 
Persons responsible for the injury caused by the death of the victim shall be obliged to reimburse the 
necessary expenses on burial to the person who incurred these expenses. 
The burial benefit received by private persons who incurred these expenses shall not be counted 
towards the compensation for the injury. 
_ 3. The Redress of the Injury Inflicted by Defects in Goods, 
Works or Services 
Article 1095. The Grounds for the Redress of Injury Inflicted by Defects in 
Goods, Works and Services 
Injury inflicted on the life, health or assets of an individual or damage done to the property of a legal 
entity in consequence of constructive, recipe or other defects of goods, works or services, and also in 
consequence of untrustworthy or insufficient information about goods (works, services) shall be subject 
to redress by the seller or the manufacturer of goods, by the person who has fulfilled the work or rendered 
the service (executor), regardless of their fault and of the fact whether the victim has been in contractual 
relations with them or not. 
The rules, provided for by this Article, shall be applied only in cases of the acquisition of goods 
(performance of works or rendering of services) for purposes of consumption and not for use in business 
activity. 
Article 1096. Persons Responsible for the Injury Inflicted Owing to Defects in 
Goods, Works and Services 
1. Injury inflicted owing to defects in goods shall be subject to redress at the option of the victim by 
the seller or the manufacturer of goods. 
2. Injury inflicted owing to defects in works and services shall be subject to redress by the person 
who has performed the work or rendered the service (executor). 
3. Injury Inflicted owing to the non-submission of full and trustworthy information about goods 
(works, services) shall be subject to redress by the persons, referred to in Items 1 and 2 of this Article. 
Federal Law No. 213-FZ of December 17, 1999 amended Article 1097 of this Code  
See the previous text of the Article 
Article 1097. The Time-limits of the Redress of the Injury Inflicted as a Result 
of Defects in Goods, Works or Services 
1. Injury inflicted owing to defects in goods, works or services shall be subject to redress, if it has 
appeared during the established period of suitability or service time of goods (works, services), and if the 
working life has not been established, during 10 years since the production of goods (works, services). 
2. Regardless of the time of infliction, harm shall be subject to compensation if: 
in violation of the requirements of a law, a period of suitability or a service time was not 
established; 
the person to whom the goods were sold, for whom the work was done, or to whom the services 
were rendered was not warned of the necessary actions upon the expiration of the period of suitability or 
the service time and the possibility consequences in case of failure to take these actions or who was not 
provided with the full and veracious information about the goods (or work or service). 
Article 1098. The Grounds for the Release from Liability for the Injury 
Inflicted Owing to Defects in Goods, Works or Services 
A seller or a manufactures of goods, an executor of a work or service shall be absolved from 
liability in case if he proves that injury took place owing to force majeure or the contravention by the 
consumer of the rules for using goods and by the results of the work, service or of their storage. 
_ 4. Compensation for the Moral Damage 
Article 1099. General Provisions 
1. The grounds and the amount of compensation for the moral damage done to an individual shall be 
determined by the rules, provided for by this Chapter and Article 151 of this Code. 
2. The moral damage inflicted by actions (inaction) that infringe the property rights of an individual 
shall be subject to compensation in cases, provided for by the law. 
3. The moral damage shall be compensated regardless of the property damage subject to 
compensation. 
Article 1100. The Grounds for the Compensation of the Moral Damage 
The moral damage shall be compensated regardless of the guilt of the inflictor of damage in cases 
where: 
injury has been inflicted the life or health of an individual by a source of special danger; 
damage has been done to an individual as a result of his illegal conviction, the illegal institution of 
proceedings against him, the illegal application of remand in custody as a measure of suppression or of a 
written understanding not to leave his place of residence, the illegal imposition of the administrative 
penalty in the form of arrest or corrective labour; 
damage has been inflicted by the spread of information denigrating the honour, dignity and business 
standing; 
in other cases provided for by the law. 
Article 1101. The Method and Amount of the Compensation for the Moral 
Damage 
1. The moral damage shall be compensated in monetary form. 
2. The amount of the compensation for the moral damage shall be determined by a court of law 
depending on the nature of physical and moral suffering caused to the victim, and also on the degree of 
guilt of the inflictor of damage in cases when guilt is a ground for the redress of injury. In estimating the 
amount of the compensation it is necessary to take into account the requirements of reasonable and 
justice. 
The nature of physical and moral suffering shall be assessed by the court with due account of the 
actual circumstances under which the moral damage was inflicted and of the victim's individual features. 
Chapter 60. Obligations Due to Unjust Enrichment 
See Information Letter of the Presidium of the Higher Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation No. 
49 of January 11, 2000 "Overview of Handling Disputes associated with Application of Norms on 
Unjust Enrichment"  
Article 1102. The Obligation to Return Unjust Enrichment 
1. A person who has acquired or saved property (purchaser) without the grounds, established by the 
law, other legal acts or the transaction, at the expense of another person (victim) shall be obliged to return 
to the latter the property acquired or saved unjustly (unjust enrichment), except for the cases, provided for 
by Article 1109 of this Code. 
2. The rules, provided for by this Chapter, shall be applicable regardless of the fact whether unjust 
enrichment resulted from the behaviour of the purchaser of property, the victim himself, third persons or 
took place regardless of their will. 
Article 1103. The Correlation of Claims for the Return of Unjust Enrichment 
With Other Claims for the Protection of Civil Rights 
Inasmuch as the contrary is not established by this Code, other laws or other legal acts and does not 
follow from the essence of corresponding relations, the rules, envisaged by this Chapter, shall be applied 
to the following claims: 
1) for the return of the executed in an invalid transaction; 
2) for the reclamation of property by its owner from the illegal possession of other people; 
3) of one party in the obligation to the other party for the return of the executed in connection with 
this circumstance; 
4) for the redress of injury, including that inflicted by the dishonest behaviour of the enriched 
person. 
Article 1104. The Return of Unjust Enrichment in Kind 
1. Assets comprising the unjust enrichment of the purchaser shall be returned to the victim in kind. 
2. The purchaser shall be liable to the victim for any fortuitous shortage or deterioration of the 
groundlessly acquired or saved property, which have taken place after he knew or should have known 
about unjust enrichment. Until this time he shall be answerable for intent or gross negligence. 
Article 1105. Compensation for the Value of Unjust Enrichment 
1. If it is impossible to return the groundlessly acquired or saved property in kind, the purchaser 
shall compensate to the victim for the actual value of this property at the time of its acquisition, and also 
for the losses, caused by the subsequent change in the value of property, if the purchaser has not 
reimbursed its value at once after he has known about unjust enrichment. 
2. A person who groundlessly used the property of other people for the time being without his 
intention to acquire it or used the services of other people shall recompense to the victim all that he has 
saved owing to such use at the price existing at the time when this use ended and in the place where the 
use took place. 
Article 1106. The Consequences of the Groundless Transfer of the Right to 
Another Person 
A person who has transferred claims by way of cession or the right belonging to him in other way to 
another person on the basis of a non-existent or invalid obligation shall have the right to demand the 
restoration of the former position, including the return to him of the documents certifying the transferred 
right. 
Article 1107. The Reimbursement of Non-received Income to the Victim 
1. A person who has received or saved property ungroundlessly shall be obliged to return to the 
victim or to reimburse all his incomes which he derived or should have derived from this property since 
the time when he knew or should have known about unjust enrichment. 
2. Interest for the use of pecuriary means of other people (Article 395) shall be subject to addition 
for the sum of unjust pecuniary enrichment since the time when the purchaser knew or should have 
known about the groundless receipt or saving of monetary means. 
Article 1108. The Reimbursement of Expenses on Property Subject to Return 
In case of the return of the property groundlessly received or saved (Article 1104) or in case of the 
reimbursement of its value (Article 1105) the purchaser shall have the right to demand that the victim 
should compensate for the necessary expenses on the maintenance and upkeep of property since the time 
from which he is bound to receive income (Article 1106) with the offset of the received benefits. The 
right to compensation shall be lost in case when the purchaser deliberately retained property subject to 
return. 
Article 1109. Unjust Enrichment Not Subject to Return 
The following property shall not be subject to return as unjust enrichment: 
1) property transferred for the execution of the obligation before the onset of the time for execution, 
unless the obligation provides for otherwise; 
2) property transferred for the execution of the obligation upon the expiry of the period of 
limitation; 
3) wages and salaries and payment equated therewith, pensions, benefits, scholarships, the redress of 
injury inflicted on human life or health, alimony and other pecuniary sums given to an individual as 
means of subsistence in the absence of dishonesty on his part and of calculation error; 
4) pecuniary sums and other property given for the execution of a non-existent obligation, if the 
purchaser proves that the person who demands the return of property knew about the absence of the 
obligation or granted property for charity purposes. 
President of the Russian Federation  
Boris Yeltsin 
Part 3 
Adopted by the State Duma on November 1 2001 
Approved by the Federation Council on November 14 2001 
According to Federal Law No. 147-FZ of November 26 2001, Part 3 of the present Code shall enter 
into force as of March 1 2002  
Section V. Law of Succession 
Chapter 61. General Provisions Governing Succession 
Article 1110. Succession 
1. In the case of succession the deceased's estate (inheritance, assets of estate) shall pass to other 
persons by universal succession, i.e. in an unchanged, single form at the same time, except as otherwise 
required by the present Code. 
2. Succession shall be governed by the present Code and other laws and, in the cases specified by 
law, by other legal acts. 
Article 1111. Grounds for Succession 
Succession shall be by will and by operation of law. 
Succession by operation of law shall take place when and where it is not changed by a will and also 
in the other cases established by the present Code. 
Article 1112. Deceased's Estate 
The deceased's estate shall incorporate the items and other property owned by the deceased as of the 
date of opening of the inheritance, in particular, rights in rem and liabilities. 
Rights and liabilities inseparable from the personality of the deceased, in particular the right to 
alimony, right to damages for harm inflicted to the citizen's life or health and also rights and liabilities 
prohibited for succession by the present Code or other laws shall not be included in the estate. 
Personal incorporeal rights and other intangible wealth shall not be included in the estate. 
Article 1113. The Opening of an Inheritance 
An estate shall be opened on the death of a citizen. The announcement of a citizen's death by a court 
shall cause the same legal consequences as the death of a citizen. 
Article 1114. The Time of Opening of an Inheritance 
1. The day of the citizen's death shall be deemed the date of opening of the inheritance. In the case 
of announcement of a citizen's death on the day when the decision of the court whereby the citizen is 
announced dead becomes final shall be deemed the date of opening of the inheritance and in cases when 
under Item 3 of Article 45 of the present Code the day of death of the citizen is recognised as the date of 
the citizen's alleged death - the date of death indicated in the decision of the court. 
2. Citizens who die on the same day shall be deemed to have died at the same time for the purposes 
of hereditary succession, and shall not inherit from each other. In such cases the heirs of each of them 
shall be called upon to inherit. 
Article 1115. The Place of Opening of an Inheritance 
The deceased's last abode shall be deemed the place of opening of an inheritance (Article 20). 
If the last abode of a deceased person who had property on the territory of the Russian Federation is 
not known or is located outside of it, the place of opening the estate in the Russian Federation shall be 
deemed the place where the assets of such an estate are located. If such assets of estate are located in 
different places, the place where the immovable property of the estate or the most valuable part of the 
immovable property is located shall be deemed the place of opening of the inheritance, or should there be 
no immovable property, the place where movable property or the most valuable part thereof is located. 
Article 1116. Persons Who Can Be Called Upon to Inherit 
1. Those left alive as of the date of opening of the inheritance and also persons conceived during the 
lifetime of the deceased and born after the opening of the inheritance can be called upon to inherit. 
In the case of succession by will the legal entities specified in the will and existing as of the date of 
opening of the inheritance can also be called upon to inherit. 
2. In the case of succession by will the Russian Federation, Russian regions, municipal entities, 
foreign states and international organisations can be called upon to inherit, and in the case of succession 
by operation of law, the Russian Federation in compliance with Article 1151 of the present Code. 
Article 1117. Unworthy Heirs 
1. The following shall not be entitled to inherit either by operation of law or by will: citizens who by 
their deliberate illegal actions directed against the deceased or any of the deceased's heirs or against the 
exercise of the deceased's last intentions expressed in a will assisted or tried to assist in their being called 
upon to inherit or other persons' being called upon to inherit or who tried to assist in increasing the share 
of the estate they or other persons are entitled to, if such circumstances have been proven in court. 
However, citizens to whom the deceased has bequeathed property after they lost their right to inherit shall 
be entitled to inherit this property. 
Parents shall not be entitled to inherit from children in respect of whom parents have been deprived 
of their parental rights by the court, provided these rights had not been restored as of the date of opening 
the inheritance. 
2. On the application of a person concerned the court shall refuse entitlement to citizens who 
deliberately and persistently evaded performing their duties of upkeep which the deceased vested in them 
by law. 
3. According to the rules set out in Chapter 60 of the present Code, a person not having a right of 
inheritance or deprived of a right of inheritance under the present article (unworthy heir) shall return all 
property received without grounds from the estate. 
4. The regulations of the present article shall extend to heirs entitled to a compulsory share in the 
estate. 
5. The regulations of the present article shall accordingly extend to the testamentary trust (Article 
1137). If the subject matter of a testamentary trust was the performance of certain work for or the 
provision of a certain service to an unworthy beneficiary, the beneficiary shall reimburse the heir who has 
discharged the trust for the value of the work or service performed for the unworthy beneficiary. 
Chapter 62. Succession by Will 
Article 1118. General Provisions 
1. Property can be disposed of on death only by means of a will. 
2. The will can be created by a citizen who had his full dispositive capacity as of the time when it 
was created. 
3. The will shall be created in person. The will cannot be created through a representative. 
4. The will shall contain dispositions of only one citizen. The will shall not be created by two 
citizens or more. 
5. The will is a one-party deal which creates rights and duties after the opening of the inheritance. 
Article 1119. The Freedom of Will 
1. The deceased shall be entitled to leave by will at his/her discretion property to any persons, to set 
heirs' shares in the estate in any way, to deprive one, several or all legal heirs of inheritance without 
indicating reasons for such a deprivation and also to include other dispositions in the will in compliance 
with the rules of the present Code concerning succession, to revoke or alter his/her created will. 
The freedom of the will shall be limited by the rules of compulsory share of estate (Article 1149). 
2. The deceased shall not be obligated to inform anybody of the content, creation, alteration or 
revocation of a will. 
Article 1120. The Right to Leave Any Property in a Will 
The deceased shall be entitled to create a will containing dispositions relating to any property, in 
particular, a property that he/she might acquire in the future. 
The deceased can dispose of his/her property or a portion thereof by means of one or several wills. 
Article 1121. The Appointment of an Heir and an Alternate Heir in a Will 
1. The deceased can create a will for the benefit of one or several persons (Article 1116) which are 
or are not his/her legal heirs. 
2. In his/her will the deceased can indicate an alternate heir (can sub-appoint an heir) for the case of 
death of the heir appointed by him/her in the will or death of the legal heir prior to the opening of the 
inheritance or simultaneously with the deceased's death or after the opening of the inheritance but before 
accepting the inheritance or the heir's failure to accept the inheritance due to other reasons or refusal to 
accept it or lack of entitlement or the heir's being refused the inheritance as an unworthy heir. 
Article 1122. The Shares of Heirs in Property Left by a Will 
1. Property left by will to two or several heirs without their shares in the estate being specified and 
without an indication as to who is to take the specific items or rights from the estate shall be deemed left 
by will to heirs in equal shares. 
2. In a will an indication of a portion of an indivisible item (Article 133) intended for each of the 
heirs in kind shall not cause the invalidity of the will. Such item shall be deemed left by will in shares 
corresponding to the value of these portions. The procedure for the heirs to use this indivisible item shall 
be established in compliance with the portions of the item intended for them in the will. 
In a certificate of the right to inheritance relating to an indivisible item left by will in shares in kind, 
the shares of the heirs and the procedure for use of such item, given the consent of the heirs, shall be 
specified in compliance with the present article. If a dispute between the heirs occurs, their shares and the 
procedure for use of the indivisible item shall be determined by a court. 
Article 1123. The Secrecy of a Will 
A notary, another person attesting to a will, translator, executor of the will and also a citizen who 
signs a will on the deceased's behalf shall not disclose information concerning the content of the will, its 
creation, alteration or revocation before the opening of the inheritance. 
If the secrecy of a will is violated, the testator shall be entitled to claim reimbursement for moral 
harm and also use other remedies to protect civil rights as laid down in the present Code. 
Article 1124. General Rules Concerning the Form of and Procedure for the 
Creation of a Will 
1. The will shall be created in writing and attested by a notary. A will can be attested by other 
persons in the cases specified in Item 7 of Article 1125, Article 1127 and Item 2 of Article 1128 of the 
present Code. 
Failure to observe the rules established by the present Code as concerning the written form and 
attestation of a will shall cause the invalidity of the will. 
A will can be drawn up in simple written form only in exceptional cases as specified in Article 1129 
of the present Code. 
2. If under the rules of the present Code witnesses are in attendance when a will is drawn up, signed 
and attested or when a will is passed to a notary the following persons shall not be such witnesses and 
shall not sign the will on the testator's behalf: 
a notary or other person who attests to the will; 
a person being a beneficiary of the will or a testamentary trust, the spouse, children and parents of 
the person; 
citizens without full dispositive capacity; 
illiterate persons; 
citizens with such physical disabilities that do not allow them to understand the essence of the event 
in full; 
persons without a sufficient degree of command of the language in which the will is written, except 
for cases of a closed will. 
3. In events when under the rules of the present Code the attendance of witnesses is compulsory 
when a will is drawn up, signed and attested or when a will is passed to a notary, the absence of a witness 
when the said actions are being committed shall cause the invalidity of the will and the lack of the 
witness's compliance with the provisions of Item 2 of the present article may be deemed a ground for the 
will's being recognised as void. 
4. The will shall bear an indication of the place and date of its attestation, except for the case 
specified in Article 1126 of the present Code. 
Article 1125. A Will Attested by a Notary 
1. A will attested by a notary shall be signed by the testator or written by a notary on the testator's 
words. Technical facilities can be used to write or record a will (computer, typewriter etc.). 
2. A will written by a notary on a testator's words shall be read in full by the testator in the presence 
of the notary before it is signed. If the testator cannot read the will by himself (herself) the notary shall 
read out the text for him/her, with a relevant annotation to this effect being entered in the will as including 
the reasons why the testator could not read the will by himself (herself). 
3. The will shall be signed by the testator's own hand. 
If a testator, due to physical disability, grave illness or illiteracy, cannot sign a will by his/her own 
hand the will can be signed on his/her behalf on his/her request by another citizen with a notary in 
attendance. The will shall include the reasons why the testator could not sign the will by himself (herself) 
and also the full name and residential address of the citizen who signed the will on the testator's request, 
in compliance with the citizen's personal identity document. 
4. A witness can be in attendance when a will is drawn up and attested by a notary if the testator so 
wishes. 
If a will is drawn up and attested with a witness in attendance it shall be signed by the witness and it 
shall bear an indication of the full name and residential address of the witness in compliance with the 
witness's personal identity document. 
5. The notary shall warn the witness and also citizens who signs a will on the testator's behalf of the 
need for observing the will nondisclosure clause (Article 1123). 
6. While attesting to a will the notary shall explain to the testator the content of Article 1149 of the 
present Code and enter a relevant annotation. 
7. Where under law the officials of local government bodies and officials of consular institutions of 
the Russian Federation have a right to accomplish notarial actions the will can be attested by a relevant 
official instead of a notary, in compliance with the rules of the present Code concerning the form of a 
will, the procedure for notarial attestation of a will and secrecy of a will. 
See the Instructions on the Procedure for the Officials of Executive Governmental Bodies for 
Accomplishing Notarial Actions endorsed by the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation of 
March 19 1996 
Article 1126. Closed Wills 
1. The testator shall be entitled to create a will without providing other persons, including a notary, 
with the chance of familiarising himself with the content thereof (a closed will). 
2. The closed will shall be hand-written and signed by the testator. Failure to observe these rules 
shall cause the invalidity of the will. 
3. The closed will shall be passed in a sealed envelope by the testator to a notary in the presence of 
two witnesses who shall put their signatures on the envelope. The envelope signed by the witnesses shall 
be put into another envelope and sealed in the presence of the notary, who shall enter an annotation on the 
envelope with information on the testator from whom the notary has accepted the closed will, on the place 
and date of acceptance thereof, the full names and residential addresses of each of the witnesses in 
compliance with their personal identity documents. 
When the notary accepts the envelope with the closed will from the testator, the notary shall explain 
to the testator the content of Item 2 of the present article and Article 1149 of the present Code and shall 
enter a relevant annotation in the second envelope and shall also issue a document to the testator to 
confirm the acceptance of the closed will. 
4. Upon the presentation of a certificate of death of a person who has created a closed will, a notary 
shall within 15 days after the presentation of the certificate open the envelope with the will in the 
presence of at least two witnesses and the persons concerned from among the legal heirs who expressed 
their desire to attend. After the opening of the envelope the text of the will contained therein shall be 
immediately read out by the notary, whereafter the notary shall draw up and sign together with the 
witnesses a protocol which acknowledges that the envelope with the will has been opened and that it 
contains the full text of the will. The original will shall be kept in the custody of the notary. A copy of the 
protocol attested by a notary shall be issued to the heirs. 
Article 1127. Wills Qualifying as Wills Attested by a Notary 
1. The following shall qualify as wills attested by a notary: 
1) wills of citizens undergoing medical treatment in in-patient institutions, hospitals, other stationary 
medical treatment institutions or residing in old-age and disabled nursing houses attested by the chief 
physicians, deputy chief physicians in charge of medical work or physicians on duty at these in-patient 
institutions, hospitals and other stationary medical treatment institutions and also the chiefs of the 
hospitals, directors or chief physicians of old-age and disabled nursing houses; 
2) wills of citizens who stay aboard vessels during their navigation, if such vessels navigate under 
the State Flag of the Russian Federation, attested by the captains of these vessels; 
3) will of citizens who are in prospecting, Arctic or other similar expeditions, attested by the chiefs 
of these expeditions; 
4) wills of military servicemen and in the places of deployment of military units where there are no 
notaries, also wills of civilians employed by these units, members of their families and members of the 
families of military servicemen, attested by the commanders of the military units; 
5) wills of citizens staying at penitentiary institutions, attested by the chiefs of the penitentiary 
institutions. 
2. A will qualifying as a will attested by a notary shall be signed by the testator in the presence of 
the person attesting to the will and of a witness, who shall also sign the will. 
As far as the rest is concerned, such a will shall be subject to the rules of Articles 1124 and 1125 of 
the present Code. 
3. A will attested in compliance with the present article shall be forwarded, as soon as possible, by 
the person who has attested it to the place of abode of the testator via the justice bodies. If the person who 
has attested a will knows the place of abode of the testator the will shall be forwarded directly to a 
relevant notary. 
4. If in any of the cases mentioned in Item 1 of the present article a citizen who intends to create a 
will expresses his/her intention to invite a notary for this purpose and there is a reasonable possibility for 
satisfying such an intention, the persons who enjoy under the said item the right of attesting a will shall 
do their best to invite a notary to the testator. 
Article 1128. The Testamentary Disposition of Funds in Banks 
1. The right to funds paid by a citizen as a bank deposit or in any other bank account of the citizen 
may be left by will or in compliance with the procedure set out in Articles 1124 - 1127 of the present 
Code or by means of creation of testamentary dispositions in writing in the branch of bank where the 
account is located. Such testamentary dispositions shall have the effect of a will attested by a notary in 
respect of the funds kept in the account. 
2. Testamentary disposition of rights to funds in a bank shall be signed by the hand of the testator 
and include the date of creation and shall be attested by a bank official entitled to accept for execution the 
client's instructions concerning the funds in his/her account. The procedure for creation of testamentary 
dispositions in respect of funds in banks shall be set out by the Government of the Russian Federation. 
3. Rights to funds in respect of which testamentary dispositions have been created in a bank shall be 
incorporated in the estate and be generally inherited in compliance with the rules of the present Code. 
These funds shall be handed out to heirs under a certificate of right to inheritance and in compliance 
therewith, except for the cases specified in Item 3 of Article 1174 of the present Code. 
4. Accordingly, the rules of the present article shall be applicable to other credit organisations 
entitles to raise citizens' funds in deposit or other accounts. 
Article 1129. Wills under Extraordinary Circumstances 
1. A citizen who is in a situation that obviously threatens his/her life and who, by the virtue of 
prevailing extraordinary circumstances, is deprived of an opportunity to create a will under the rules of 
Articles 1124 - 1128 of the present Code may make his/her last wishes as to the disposition of his/her 
property in a simple written form. 
The citizen's last wishes set out in simple written form shall be deemed his/her will, if the testator 
has written a document in his/her own hand in the presence of two witnesses the content whereof 
evidences that it is a will. 
2. A will created under the circumstances specified in Paragraph 1 of Item 1 of the present article 
shall no longer be valid if within one month after the termination of these circumstances the testator fails 
to create a will in any other form specified in Articles 1124 - 1128 of the present Code. 
3. In accordance with the present article a will created under extraordinary circumstances shall be 
subject to execution only on the condition that a court acting on the request of the persons concerned 
confirms the fact that the will has been created under extraordinary circumstances. The said claim shall be 
filed before the expiry of the term set for acceptance of the inheritance. 
Article 1130. The Revocation and Alteration of a Will 
1. The testator shall be entitled to revoke or alter a will he/she has created, at any time after the 
creation thereof without an indication of the reason for the revocation or alteration. 
No one's consent is required for revoking or altering a will, in particular, of persons appointed as 
heirs in the will that is being revoked or altered. 
2. The testator is entitled, by means of a new will, to revoke a previous will as a whole or to amend 
it by means of revocation or alteration of specific testamentary dispositions contained therein. 
A subsequent will not containing a direct indication concerning revocation of a previous will or 
specific testamentary dispositions contained therein shall revoke the previous will in full or in as much as 
it conflicts with the subsequent will. 
A will fully or partially revoked by a subsequent will shall not be deemed restored if the subsequent 
will is revoked by the testator in full or in as much as the relevant portion is concerned. 
3. In the case of invalidity of the subsequent will, succession shall take effect according to the 
previous will. 
4. Also a will can be revoked by means of will revocation dispositions. The will revocation 
dispositions shall be created in the form established by the present Code for the creation of a will. The 
will revocation instructions shall be therefore subject to the rules of Item 3 of the present article. 
5. A will created under extraordinary circumstances (Article 1129) can only revoke or alter the same 
kind of will. 
6. Testamentary dispositions in a bank (Article 1128) can only revoke or alter testamentary 
dispositions concerning the disposition of funds in this bank. 
Article 1131. Invalidity of a Will 
1. In the event of violation of the provisions of the present Code causing the invalidity of a will, 
depending on the grounds for the invalidity, the will shall be deemed invalid by virtue of having been 
recognised as such by a court (a contentious will) or irrespective of such recognition (a will that is null 
and void). 
2. A will can be recognised as void by a court on the complaint filed by a person whose rights or 
lawful interests are violated by the will. A will shall not be subject to contention before the opening of the 
inheritance. 
3. Slips of the pen and other insignificant breaches of the procedure for the creation, signing or 
attestation of a will shall not serve as grounds for the invalidity of a will if a court has established that 
they do not affect the construction of the testator's will. 
4. Both a will and its specific testamentary dispositions can be void. The invalidity of specific 
dispositions contained in a will shall not be deemed to affect the rest of the will if one can suppose that it 
would have been included in the will even if the void dispositions were not there. 
5. The invalidity of a will shall not deprive the persons specified therein as heirs or beneficiaries of 
the right to succession by operation of law or under another will that is valid. 
Article 1132. Construction of Wills 
While constructing a will a notary, executor or court shall take into account the literal meaning of 
the words and expressions contained therein. 
If the literal meaning of a provision of a will is vague it shall be established by means of comparison 
with other provisions and the sense of the will as a whole. In such cases the fullest exercise of the 
testator's will shall be ensured. 
Article 1133. Execution of Wills 
Execution of a will shall be effected by heirs under the will, except for cases when its execution is 
fully or partially effected by the executor of the will (Article 1134). 
Article 1134. Executor of Wills 
1. The testator may appoint a personal representative (executor) specified in the will to execute the 
will, irrespective of his/her being an heir or not. 
The citizen's consent to act as executor shall be expressed by the citizen by means of his signature in 
the will or in an application attached thereto or in an application filed with the notary within one month 
after the date of opening of the inheritance. 
A citizen shall be deemed to have granted his/her consent to act a the executor of a will if he/she 
proceeds to execute the will within one month after the date of opening of the inheritance. 
2. After the opening of an inheritance the court can relieve the executor of the will from his/her 
duties either on his/her own request or on the request of heirs if there are circumstances obstructing the 
execution of his/her duties. 
Article 1135. The Powers of the Executor of the Will 
1. The powers of the executor of a will shall be based on the will whereby he/she is appointed as 
executor and they shall be certified by a certificate issued by the notary. 
2. Except as otherwise required by the will, the executor of the will shall take the measures required 
for executing the will, namely: 
1) arrange for the passage of assets of estate to the heirs entitled thereto in compliance with the 
wishes of the testator expressed in the will and law; 
2) take measures on his/her own or through the notary for preserving the estate and administering it 
in the interests of the heirs; 
3) receive the amounts of money owed to the testator and other assets for the purpose of passing 
them to the heirs, unless the assets are subject to transfer to other persons (Item 1 Article 1183); 
4) perform testamentary dispositions or demand that heirs perform under testamentary trust 
provisions (Article 1137) under provisions whereby they are to execute a duty (Article 1139). 
3. The executor of a will shall be entitled to act in connection with the execution of the will in his 
own name, in particular, in court, other governmental bodies and institutions. 
Article 1136. Reimbursement of Expenses Relating to the Execution of a Will 
The executor of a will shall be entitled to receive a reimbursement on the account of the estate for 
the necessary expenses incurred in connection with execution of the will and also a remuneration on the 
account of the estate if there is a provision to this effect in the will. 
Article 1137. Testamentary Trust 
1. The testator is entitled to vest in one or several heirs a duty by will or by operation of law the 
execution of a duty of property nature for the benefit of one or several persons (beneficiaries) who acquire 
a right to claim execution of the duty (testamentary trust). 
A testamentary trust shall be established in the will. 
A will may contain a testamentary trust only. 
2. The object of the testamentary trust can be transferred to a beneficiary into his/her ownership, 
possession by another right in rem or use of an item incorporated in the estate, transfer to a beneficiary of 
an item in action incorporated in the estate, acquisition for a beneficiary and transfer thereto of another 
property, performance of specific work for him/her or the provision thereto of a specific service or the 
making of periodical payments for his/her benefit etc. 
In particular, an heir entitled to a residential house, an apartment or other housing accommodation 
may be vested by a testator with the duty to grant a right to use this facility or a part thereof to another 
person for the lifetime of such a person or for another term. 
At a subsequent transfer of the title to assets of estate to another person the right of use of such 
assets granted by a testamentary trust shall remain in effect. 
3. Relationships between a beneficiary (creditor) and an heir vested with the duty of executing a 
testamentary trust (debtor) shall be subject to the provisions of the present Code concerning liabilities, 
except as otherwise required by the rules of the present section and the essence of the testamentary trust. 
4. The right to receive a testamentary trust shall be in effect for a three-year term after the date of 
opening of an inheritance and shall be non-transferable to other persons. However, an alternate 
beneficiary may be appointed together with a beneficiary in cases when the beneficiary dies before the 
opening of the inheritance or simultaneously with the testator or refuses to accept the testamentary trust, 
did not exercise his/her right to receive the testamentary trust or is deprived of the right to receive the 
testamentary trust in compliance with the rules of Item 5 Article 1117 of the present Code. 
Article 1138. Execution of a Testamentary Trust 
1. An heir vested with the duty to execute a testamentary trust shall execute it within the limits of 
the value of the portion of estate he/she took less the testator's debts relating to the heir. 
If an heir vested with the duty to execute a testamentary trust is entitled to a compulsory share of 
estate, his duty to execute the testamentary trust shall be limited to the value of the portion of estate 
he/she took which exceeds the amount of his/her compulsory share. 
2. If the duty to execute a testamentary trust is vested in several heirs, such a gift shall be an 
encumbrance on the right of each of them to the estate commensurately to one's share in the estate, except 
as otherwise required by the will. 
3. If a beneficiary dies before the opening of the inheritance or simultaneously with the testator or 
refused to receive a testamentary trust (Article 1160), had not exercised his/her right to receive the 
testamentary trust within a three-year term after the opening of the inheritance or was deprived of the 
right to receive the testamentary trust in compliance with the rules of Article 1117 of the present Code, 
the heir with the duty to execute the testamentary trust shall be relieved from the duty, except for cases 
when an alternate heir has been appointed for this heir. 
Article 1139. Private Purpose Trust 
1. In a will the testator may vest in one or several heirs a duty by will or by operation of law to 
commit an action of property or nonproperty nature aimed at attaining a commonly beneficial aim 
(private purpose trust). Such a duty may also be vested in the executor of a will on the condition that the 
will allocates a portion of assets of the estate for the purposes of execution of the private purpose trust. 
The testator is also entitled to vest in one or several heirs the duty of upkeeping domestic animals 
belonging to the testator and also of exercising the necessary supervision and care in respect thereof. 
2. A private purpose trust whose object is actions of property nature shall be subject to the rules of 
Article 1138 of the present Code. 
3. Persons concerned, the executor of the will and any of the heirs are entitled to claim in court the 
enforcement of a private purpose trust, except as otherwise required by the will. 
Article 1140. Transfer of the Duty to Execute a Testamentary Trust or Private 
Purpose Trust to Other Heirs 
If, as the result of the circumstances specified in the present Code the portion of the estate due to a 
heir vested with a duty to execute a testamentary trust or private purpose trust is transferred to other heirs 
the latter shall execute the testamentary trust or private purpose trust, except as otherwise required by the 
will or law. 
Chapter 63. Succession by Operation of Law 
Article 1141. General Provisions 
1. Legal heirs shall be called upon to inherit in compliance with the priority ranking set out in 
Articles 1142 - 1145 and 1148 of the present Code. 
The heirs of each next category shall inherit if there are no heirs of the preceding categories, i.e. if 
there are no heirs of the preceding categories 
or if neither of them are entitled to inherit or if all of them have been barred from inheritance 
(Article 1117), or deprived of inheritance (Item 1 Article 1119), if neither of them have accepted 
inheritance or if all of them have disclaimed inheritance. 
2. Heirs of one category shall inherit in equal shares, except for the heirs who inherit by right of 
representation (Article 1146). 
Article 1142. First Category Heirs 
1. Legal heirs of the first category are the children, spouse and parents of the testator. 
2. The testator's grandchildren and their issue shall inherit by right of representation. 
Article 1143. Second Category Heirs 
1. If there are no heirs of the first category the legal heirs of the second category shall be the full and 
half brothers and sisters of the testator, his grandfather and grandmother both on the side of the father and 
on the side of the mother. 
2. The children of full and half brothers and sisters of the testator (nephews, nieces of the testator) 
shall inherit by right of representation. 
Article 1144. Third Category Heirs 
1. If there are no heirs of the first and second categories the legal heirs of the third category shall be 
the full and half brothers and sisters of the of the parents of the testator (uncles and aunts of the testator). 
2. Cousins of the testator shall inherit by right of representation. 
Article 1145. Next Category Heirs 
1. If there are no heirs of the first, second and third categories (Articles 1142 - 1144), the right to 
inherit by law shall be acquired by the testator's relatives of the third, fourth and fifth degree of kinship 
who do not qualify as heirs of the preceding categories. 
The degree of kinship shall be determined by the number of births that separate relatives from each 
other. The birth of the testator in this case does not count. 
2. Under Item 1 of the present article the following shall be called upon to inherit: 
as heirs of the fourth category: relatives of the third degree of kinship - great grandfathers and great 
grandmothers of the testator; 
as heirs of the fifth category: relatives of the fourth degree of kinship - children of full nephews and 
nieces of the testator (grandsons and granddaughters once removed) and brothers and full sisters of their 
grandfathers and grandmothers (grandsons and granddaughters once removed) and full brothers and 
sisters 
of their grandfathers and grandmothers once removed); 
as the heirs of the sixth category: relatives of the fifth degree of kinship - children of grandsons and 
granddaughters of the testator once removed (grand grandsons and grand granddaughters once removed), 
children of his cousins (nephews and nieces once removed) and children of his grandfathers and 
grandmothers once removed (uncles and aunts once removed). 
3. If there are no heirs of the preceding categories the following shall be called upon to inherit as 
heirs of the seventh category by law: stepsons, stepdaughters, the stepfather and the stepmother of the 
testator. 
Article 1146. Succession by Right of Representation 
1. The share of a legal heir who has died before the opening of the inheritance or simultaneously 
with the testator shall be passed by right of representation to his relevant issue in the cases specified in 
Item 2 of Article 1142, Item 2 of Article 1143 and Item 2 of Article 1144 of the present Code and it shall 
be divided between them in equal shares. 
2. The issue of a legal heir who has been deprived of inheritance by the testator (Item 1 of Article 
1119) shall not inherit by right of representation. 
3. The issue of an heir who has died before the opening of the inheritance or simultaneously with the 
testator and who would not have had a right of inheritance under Item 1 of Article 1117 of the present 
Code shall not inherit by the right of representation. 
Article 1147. Succession by Adopted Children and Adopters 
1. In the case of succession by operation of law an adopted child and his/her issue on one side and 
the adopter and his/her relatives on the other side shall qualify as relatives by origin (blood relatives). 
2. The adopted child and his/her issue shall not inherit by operation of law after the death of the 
parents of the adopted child and other blood relatives thereof and the parents of the adopted child and 
other blood relatives thereof shall not inherit by operation of law after the death of the adopted child and 
his/her issue, except for the cases specified in Item 3 of the present article. 
3. In cases when under the Family Code of the Russian Federation an adopted child retains under a 
court decision relations with one of his/her parents or other blood relatives the adopted child and his/her 
issue shall inherit by operation of law after the death of these relatives and the latter shall inherit by 
operation of law after the death of the adopted child and his/her posterity. 
Inheritance under the present item shall not exclude inheritance under Item 1 of the present article. 
Article 1148. Succession by Disabled Dependants of the Testator 
1. Citizens qualifying as the legal heirs specified in Articles 1143 - 1145 of the present Code who 
are disabled as of the date of opening of the inheritance but not included in the category of heirs are called 
upon to inherit shall inherit by operation of law together and in equal shares with the heirs of that 
category if they had been dependants of the testator for at least a one-year term preceding the death of the 
testator, regardless of whether they resided together with the testator or not. 
2. Legal heirs shall be deemed citizens not included in the circle of heirs specified in Articles 1142 - 
1145 of the Code but who were disabled when the inheritance was opened who had been dependants of 
the testator at least for the one-year term preceding the death of the testator and resided together with 
him/her. If other legal heirs exist they shall inherit together pari passu with the heirs of the category called 
upon to inherit. 
3. If there are no other legal heirs the disabled dependants of the testator shall inherit by themselves 
as eighth category heirs. 
Article 1149. The Right to a Compulsory Share of Estate 
1. The minor or disabled children of the testator, his disabled spouse and parents and also the 
disabled dependants of the testator who are subject to be called upon to inherit under Items 1 and 2 of 
Article 1148 of the present Code shall inherit irrespective of the content of the will at least half of the 
share each of them is entitled to in the case of succession by operation of law (compulsory share). 
2. The right to a compulsory share in an estate shall be satisfied out of the residual part of the estate 
even if it is going to diminish the rights of other legal heirs to that portion of estate and if the 
nonbequeathed part of assets is insufficient to satisfy the right to compulsory share, out of the portion of 
assets that has been bequeathed. 
3. Everything that an heir entitled to a compulsory share takes out of the estate on any ground shall 
count as part of the compulsory share, in particular, the value of a testamentary trust established for the 
benefit of such an heir. 
4. If the exercise of a right to a compulsory share of an estate is going to cause the impossibility of 
passing to an heir property which was not used during the testator's lifetime by an heir entitled to a 
compulsory share and which had been used by an heir by will as his residential facility (a residential 
house, apartment, other living quarters, dacha etc.) or used as the main source of means of subsistence 
(means of labour, a creative studio etc.) the court may cut the size of the compulsory share or refuse to 
award such a share with due regard to the property status of the heirs entitled to a compulsory share. 
Article 1150. The Rights of a Spouse to Inheritance 
The right of inheritance that the surviving spouse of the testator has by will or by operation of law 
shall not diminish the spouse's right to the portion of property gained during the period of marriage with 
the testator and deemed their common property. The share of the deceased spouse in this property 
determined in compliance with Article 256 of the present Code shall be deemed a part of the estate and it 
shall pass to the heirs in compliance with the rules established by the present Code. 
Article 1151. Escheat 
1. If there are no legal heirs and heirs by will or if neither of the heirs has a right to inherit or all 
heirs have been deprived of their right of inheritance (Article 1117) or neither of the heirs have accepted 
the inheritance or all the heirs refused their inheritance and neither of them has indicated that the 
inheritance is waived for the benefit of another heir (Article 1158) the decedent's estate shall be deemed 
escheat. 
2. Escheat property shall pass into the ownership of the Russian Federation by succession by 
operation of law. 
3. The procedure for succession and recording of escheat property and also the procedure for 
transferring such property into the ownership of Russian regions or municipal entities shall be set out by a 
law. 
As of now the Regulations on the Procedure for Recording, Evaluating and Selling Confiscated 
Property, Property in Abeyance, Property Transferred to the State by Way of Succession, and 
Valuables endorsed by Decision of the Council of Ministers of the USSR No. 683 of June 29 1984 and 
also Instructions of the Ministry of Finance of the USSR No. 185 of December 19 1984 on the 
Procedure for Recording, Evaluating and Selling Confiscated Property, Property in Abeyance, 
Property Transferred to the State by Way of Succession, and Valuables 
Chapter 64. Acquisition of Inheritance 
Article 1152. Acceptance of Inheritance 
1. To acquire inheritance a heir shall accept it. No acceptance is required for the acquisition of 
escheat property (Article 1151). 
2. The acceptance of a portion of inheritance by an heir means acceptance of the whole inheritance 
due to him/her, whatever the nature and the whereabouts thereof. 
When an heir is called upon to inherit simultaneously on several grounds (by will and by operation 
of law or by hereditary transition and as the result of opening an inheritance etc.) the heir may accept an 
inheritance he is entitled to on one of these grounds, on several of them or on all of them. 
No acceptance of inheritance shall be stipulated by conditions or special clauses. 
3. The acceptance of an inheritance by one or several heirs shall not mean an acceptance of 
inheritance by other heirs. 
4. An accepted inheritance shall be recognised as owned by the heir from the date of opening of the 
inheritance, irrespective of the time of the actual acceptance and also irrespective of the time of state 
registration of the heir's rights to assets of estate where such a right is subject to state registration. 
Article 1153. The Methods of Accepting an Inheritance 
1. An inheritance is accepted by means of the heir's filing an inheritance acceptance application or 
an application for a certificate of the right to the inheritance with the notary or personal representative 
under law at the place of opening of the inheritance. 
If an heir's application is passed to the notary by another person or the signature of the heir is mailed 
on the application shall be attested by a notary, an official empowered to accomplish notarial actions 
(Item 7 of Article 1125) or a person empowered to attest powers of attorney in compliance with Item 3 of 
Article 185 of the present Code). 
An inheritance can be accepted through a representative if the power of accepting an inheritance is 
specifically established in powers of attorney. No powers of attorney are required for a personal 
representative to accept an estate. 
2. Until and unless the contrary is proven, an heir shall be deemed to have accepted an inheritance if 
he has committed actions evidencing an actual acceptance of the inheritance, in particular, if the heir: 
has commenced possession or administration of assets of the estate; 
has taken measures for preserving assets of the estate, protecting it against third persons' 
encroachments or claims; 
has incurred expenses on his account towards maintenance of assets of the estate; 
has paid the testator's debts or received from third persons amounts of money payable to the testator. 
Article 1154. The Term for Acceptance of an Inheritance 
1. An inheritance can be accepted within six months after the date of opening of the inheritance. 
If the inheritance is opened on the date of the alleged death of a citizen (Item 1 of Article 1114) the 
inheritance can be accepted within six months after the date when the court decision whereby the citizen 
is announced dead becomes final. 
2. If a right of inheritance emerges for other persons as the result of an heir's disclaimer of an 
inheritance or an heir's disqualification on the grounds established by Article 1117 of the present Code 
such person can accept the inheritance within six months after the date of occurrence of their right of 
inheritance. 
3. Persons whose right of inheritance occurs only due to an heir's non-acceptance of an inheritance 
can take the inheritance within three months after the expiry of the term specified in Item 1 of the present 
article. 
Article 1155. Acceptance of an Inheritance upon the Expiry of the Established 
Term 
1. On the application filed late by a heir as concerning the term set for acceptance of an inheritance 
(Article 1154) the court may reinstate the term and recognise the heir as having accepted the inheritance if 
the heir did not know and was not supposed to know of the opening of the inheritance or if the heir has 
missed the term due to other legitimate reasons and on the condition that the heir who missed the term set 
for acceptance of the inheritance has filed his/her application with the court within six months after the 
time when the causes/reasons for the lateness ceased to exist. 
Having recognised an heir as having accepted an inheritance, the court shall determine the shares of 
all the heirs in the estate and if necessary shall designate measures for safeguarding the rights of the new 
heir to his/her entitlement (Item 3 of the present Article). The certificates of a right of inheritance issued 
earlier shall be recognised by the court as void. 
2. An heir can accept an inheritance after the expiry of the term set for the acceptance thereof 
without resorting to the court if all the other heirs who have accepted the inheritance grant their consent 
thereto in writing. If such a written consent is granted by heirs in the absence of a notary, their signatures 
on the documents whereby the consent is granted shall be attested in the manner specified in Paragraph 2 
of Item 1 of Article 1153 of the present Code. The heirs' consent shall be deemed a ground for a notary to 
annul the certificate of right of inheritance issued earlier and to issue a new certificate. 
If, under a certificate issued earlier, state registration has been accomplished in respect of a right to 
immovable property, the notary's decision to annul the certificate issued earlier and the new certificate 
shall be deemed a ground for amending the state registration records correspondingly. 
3. A heir who accepts an inheritance after the expiry of the established term in keeping with the 
rules set out in the present article shall be entitled to take his/her entitlement in compliance with the rules 
of Articles 1104, 1105, 1107 and 1108 of the present Code which, in the case specified in Item 2 of the 
present Article, shall be applicable except as otherwise required by a written agreement concluded by the 
heirs. 
Article 1156. The Transfer of a Right to Accept an Inheritance (Hereditary 
Transition) 
1. If an heir called upon to inherit by will or by operation of law dies after the opening of the 
inheritance without having accepted it within the established term, the right of accepting his/her 
entitlement shall pass to his/her legal heirs, or if all assets of the estate have been left by will, to his/her 
heirs by will (hereditary transition). The right of accepting an inheritance by way of hereditary transition 
is not incorporated into the estate left after the death of such a heir. 
2. The right of accepting an inheritance that belonged to a deceased heir may be exercised by his/her 
heirs on general terms. 
If the portion of the term set for the purposes of inheritance acceptance that remains after the death 
of an heir is less than three months, the term shall be extended to reach three months. Upon the expiry of 
the term set for inheritance acceptance purposes the heirs of a deceased heir may be recognised by the 
court as having accepted the inheritance under Article 1155 of the present Code if the court is of the 
opinion that the reasons for the lateness are legitimate. 
3. The right of an heir to accept a portion of inheritance as a compulsory share (Article 1149) shall 
not be transferable to his/her heirs. 
Article 1157. The Right of Disclaimer 
1. The heir is entitled to disclaim the gift he is entitled to, for the benefit of other persons (Article 
1158) or without an indication of a person for whose benefit he rejects his/her gift. 
No disclaimer shall be possible in the case of escheat. 
2. The heir is entitled to disclaim the gift he is entitled to within a term set for acceptance of 
inheritance (Article 1154), in particular, in cases when he has already accepted the gift. 
If the heir has committed actions evidencing the actual acceptance of an inheritance (Item 2 of 
Article 1153) a court may recognise him/her as having disclaimed the inheritance on the application of 
such heir, in particular, after the expiry of the set term if the court finds that the reasons for the lateness 
are legitimate. 
3. A disclaimer of an inheritance shall not be subject to alteration or reversed. 
4. In the case of a minor heir, an heir lacking dispositive capacity or having a partial dispositive 
capacity disclaimer of an inheritance shall be admitted on a preliminary consent of the body of tutorship 
and guardianship. 
Article 1158. Disclaimer of an Inheritance for the Benefit of Other Persons and 
Disclaimer of a Portion of a Gift 
1. The heir is entitled to disclaim an inheritance for the benefit of other persons from among the 
heirs under a will or who belong to any category and who have not been refused inheritance (Item 1 
Article 1119), in particular, for the benefit of those who were called upon to inherit by the right of 
representation or inheritance transition (Article 1156). 
No disclaimer shall be for the benefit of any of the above persons: 
of assets inherited under a will if the whole of the decedent's estate is left by will for heirs appointed 
by the decedent; 
of a compulsory share of an estate (Article 1149); 
if an alternate heir has been appointed for the heir in question (Article 1121); 
2. No disclaimer shall be for the benefit of persons who are not specified in Item 1 of the present 
article. 
No disclaimer of inheritance shall be stipulated by conditions or special clauses. 
3. An heir shall not disclaim a portion of his/her gift. However, if an heir is called upon to inherit 
simultaneously on several grounds (by will, by law or by inheritance transition or as a result of opening of 
an inheritance etc.) he shall be entitled to disclaim the gift he is entitled to on one of these grounds, on 
several of them or on all of them. 
Article 1159. Methods of Disclaimer 
1. The disclaimer of an inheritance shall be effected by the heir by means of filing a disclaimer 
application with a notary or official empowered under law to issue certificates of inheritance at the place 
of opening of the inheritance. 
2. If a disclaimer application is filed with a notary by a person other than the heir or if it is mailed 
the signature of the heir on such application shall be attested in the manner established in Paragraph 2 of 
Item 1 of Article 1153 of the present Code. 
3. An inheritance may be disclaimed through a representative if disclaimer powers are laid down in 
the powers of attorney. No powers of attorney is required for a legal representative to disclaim 
inheritance. 
Article 1160. Right of Disclaimer of a Testamentary Trust 
1. The beneficiary is entitled to refuse accepting a trust (Article 1137). In this case no trust for the 
benefit of another person, a trust stipulated by a clause or condition is permitted. 
2. If the beneficiary is at the same time an heir his/her right specified in the present article shall not 
depend on his/her right to accept the inheritance or disclaim it. 
Article 1161. Increment of Shares of Estate 
1. If an heir does not accept his/her gift, disclaims his/her gift without indicating that the disclaimer 
is for the benefit of another heir (Article 1158), does not have the right to inherit or if his/her right of 
inheritance is forfeited on the grounds established by Article 1117 of the present Code or as a result of 
invalidity of the will the portion of the estate to which such heir would have been entitled shall pass to the 
legal heirs called upon to inherit, pro rata to their shares of the estate. 
However, if the testator has left all property to the heirs he appointed, the portion of the estate to 
which an heir who disclaimed his/her gift or who was dropped on the other specified grounds was entitled 
shall pass to the other heirs by will pro rata to their shares of the estate, except as otherwise required by 
the will in respect of distribution of that portion of the estate. 
2. The rules contained in Item 1 of the present article shall not be applicable if an alternate heir 
(Item 2 Article 1121) has been appointed for the heir who disclaimed his/her gift or who was dropped on 
other grounds. 
Article 1162. Certificate of Right to Inheritance 
1. A certificate of right to inheritance shall be issued at the place of opening of the inheritance by a 
notary or an official empowered by law to accomplish such a notarial action. 
The certificate shall be issued on the application of an heir. If heirs so wish one certificate may be 
issued for all the heirs or a separate certificate may be issued to each of the heirs, for the whole of the 
estate or for specific parts thereof. 
The same procedure shall be applicable when a certificate is issued in the case of escheat in the 
Russian Federation (Article 1151). 
2. If, after the issue of a certificate of right to inheritance, assets of the estate are discovered which 
are not covered by such a certificate, an additional certificate of right to inheritance shall be issued. 
Article 1163. Term for Issue of a Certificate of Right to Inheritance 
1. A certificate of right to inheritance shall be issued to heirs at any time upon the expiry of six 
months after the date of opening of the inheritance, except for the cases specified in the present Code. 
2. In the case of succession both by will and by operation of law a certificate of right to inheritance 
may be issued before the expiry of six months after the opening of the inheritance if there is reliable 
information evidencing that there are no other heirs entitled to the inheritance or a portion thereof apart 
from the persons who have applied for the certificate. 
3. The issuance of a certificate of right to inheritance shall be suspended by the decision of a court 
and also in the case of existence of a heir conceived but not yet born. 
Article 1164. Heirs' Common Ownership 
In the case of succession by operation of law if an estate passes to two or several heirs and in the 
case of succession by will if an estate is left by will to two or several heirs without an indication of 
specific assets of the estate to be taken by each of the heirs the estate shall be put into the share ownership 
of the heirs as of the time of opening of the inheritance. 
Heirs' common ownership of assets of an estate shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 16 of 
the present Code on share ownership with due regard to the rules set out in Articles 1165 - 1170 of the 
present Code. However, in the distribution of an estate the rules of Articles 1168 - 1170 of the present 
Code shall be applicable within three years after the opening of the inheritance. 
Article 1165. Distribution of Decedent's Estate by Agreement between Heirs 
1. The assets of estate in the share ownership of two or several heirs can be divided by agreement 
between them. 
The agreement on distribution of estate shall be subject to the rules of the present Code concerning 
the form of deals and form of agreements. 
2. An agreement on distribution of estate incorporating immovable property, in particular, an 
agreement on devolution of the share of one or several heirs may be concluded by heirs after a certificate 
of right to inheritance has been issued thereon. 
The state registration of heirs' ownership of immovable property being the subject matter of an 
agreement on distribution of estate shall be accomplished on the basis of the agreement on distribution of 
estate and the certificate of a right to an inheritance issued earlier and in cases when the state registration 
of heirs' rights to immovable property has been accomplished before the heirs entered the agreement on 
distribution of estate, on the basis of the agreement on distribution of estate. 
3. A discrepancy between the way an estate is distributed by heirs in an agreement they concluded 
and the shares of the estate to which the heirs are entitled as specified in the certificate of right to 
inheritance shall not cause refusal of state registration of their rights to the immovable property received 
as the result of distribution of the estate. 
Article 1166. Safeguarding the Interests of a Child in the Case of Distribution 
of Estate 
If there is an heir who has been conceived but not yet born, distribution of an estate shall be 
accomplished only after the birth of such a heir. 
Article 1167. Safeguarding the Lawful Interests of Minors, Citizens Lacking 
Dispositive Capacity or Having a Limited Dispositive Capacity in the Case of 
Distribution of Estate 
If among the heirs there are minor citizens, citizens without dispositive capacity or having a limited 
dispositive capacity an estate shall be distributed in compliance with the rules of Article 37 of the present 
Code. 
For the purpose of safeguarding the lawful interests of the said heirs the tutorship and guardianship 
body shall be notified of the drawing up of an agreement on distribution of estate (Article 1165) has been 
drawn up and of a court's hearing a case of distribution of estate. 
Article 1168. Right in Rem Relating to an Indivisible Item in Cases of 
Distribution of Estate 
1. An heir who had a right of share ownership together with the testator in respect of an indivisible 
item (Article 133) the share in the right of which is incorporated in the estate shall have a preferential 
right of obtaining as offsetting his/her share of the estate the thing that was in common ownership, over 
the heirs who had not been party to the common ownership before, irrespective of their having used the 
item or not. 
2. An heir who had been permanently using an indivisible item (Article 133) incorporated in an 
estate shall have a preferential right of obtaining as offsetting his/her share in the estate this thing, over 
the heirs who had not been using the thing and had not been party to the common ownership thereof. 
3. If an estate incorporates housing accommodation (residential house, apartment etc.) which cannot 
be physically divided, the heirs who had been residing in the housing accommodation as of the date of 
opening of the inheritance and who do not have other housing accommodation shall have the right to 
enjoy a preferential treatment, in cases of distribution of estate, over the other heirs not being owners of 
the housing accommodation incorporated in the estate in obtaining this housing accommodation as 
offsetting their shares of the estate. 
Article 1169. Preferential Right to Ordinary Household Articles in Cases of 
Distribution of Estate 
In the case of distribution of estate an heir who had been residing as of the date of opening of an 
inheritance together with the testator shall have a preferential right of obtaining as offsetting his/her share 
of the estate household articles. 
Article 1170. Compensation of Mismatch between Received Assets of an 
Estate and the Share in the Estate 
1. A mismatch between the assets of estate claimed by an heir by a preferential right under Articles 
1168 or 1169 of the present Code and the heir's share of the estate shall be eliminated by means of his/her 
transferring other assets of the estate to other heirs or by the provision of another compensation, in 
particular, disbursement of the relevant amount of money. 
2. Except as otherwise required by an agreement between all the heirs, the exercise of a preferential 
right by any of them shall be possible after the provision of a relevant compensation to other heirs. 
Article 1171. Preservation of an Estate and Administration of an Estate 
1. For the purpose of safeguarding the rights of heirs, beneficiaries and other persons concerned the 
executor of a will or the notary at the place where an inheritance is opened shall take the measures 
specified in Articles 1172 and 1173 of the present Code as well as other necessary measures for 
preservation and administration of the estate. 
2. The notary shall take measures for preservation and administration of the estate on the application 
of one or several heirs, executor of the will, a local government body, the tutorship and guardianship body 
or other persons acting in the interests of preservation of the estate. If an executor of the will has been 
appointed (Article 1134) the notary shall take measures for preservation and administration of the estate 
in agreement with the executor. 
The executor of the will shall take measures for the preservation and administration of the estate on 
his own or at the request of one or several heirs. 
3. For the purpose of ascertaining the subject matter of gifts and preserving it banks, other credit 
institutions and other legal entities shall inform the notary, at the notary's request, of the information they 
have concerning assets belonging to the testator. The information so obtained shall be passed by the 
notary only to the executor of the will and to the heirs. 
4. The notary shall take measures for preservation and administration of the estate within a term set 
by the notary with due regard to the nature and value of the estate and also the time required for the heirs 
to commence owning their gifts but not exceeding six months, or in the cases specified in Items 2 and 3 of 
Article 1154 and Item 2 of Article 1156 of the present Code, not exceeding nine months after the opening 
of the inheritance. 
The executor of the will shall take measures for the preservation and administration of the estate 
within the term required for executing the will. 
5. In cases when assets of the estate are located in different places, the notary at the place where the 
inheritance has been opened shall forward instructions on the preservation and administration of the 
assets of the estate to the notary at the place where the relevant portion of the assets is located, via the 
bodies of justice. If the notary at the place of opening of the inheritance knows who should take measures 
for the preservation of the estate, such instructions shall be forwarded to the relevant notary or official. 
6. The procedure for preservation and administration of estate, in particular, the procedure for 
drawing up an inventory of the estate shall be determined by the legislation on notaries. The maximum 
limits on remuneration payable under an agreement of custody of estate and agreement of trust of estate 
shall be set by the Government of the Russian Federation. 
7. In cases when a right to accomplish notarial actions is granted under law to officials of local 
government bodies and officials of consular institutions of the Russian Federation the necessary measures 
for preservation and administration of an estate can be taken by the relevant official. 
Article 1172. Measures for Preservation of the Estate 
1. For the purpose of preserving an estate the notary shall draw up an inventory of the estate in the 
presence of two witnesses qualifying under the criteria established in Item 2 of Article 1124 of the present 
Code. 
The executor of the will, heirs and in relevant cases representatives of the tutorship and 
guardianship body can be in attendance when an inventory of estate is being drawn up. 
At the request of persons specified in Paragraph 2 of the present item, the estate shall be valuated by 
agreement of the heirs. If no agreement is made the estate or the portion thereof not covered by a 
valuation agreement shall be valuated by an independent appraiser on the account of the person who has 
demanded the valuation of the estate, with these expenses later being distributed among the heirs pro rata 
to the value of the assets of estate received by each of them. 
2. Money in cash incorporated in the estate shall be deposited with the notary and foreign currency 
valuables, precious metals and stones, articles made from them and securities that do not require 
management shall be handed over to a bank into the custody thereof under an agreement in compliance 
with Article 921 of the present Code. 
3. If the notary is aware that weapons make up a portion of the estate he shall notify the bodies of 
interior affairs accordingly. 
4. Assets incorporated in the estate but not specified in Items 2 and 3 of the present article, if it does 
not require management, shall be passed by the notary under an agreement to an heir into the custody 
thereof, or if it cannot be passed to a heir, to another person at the notary's discretion. 
In the case of succession by a will whereby an executor of the will is appointed, the executor of the 
will shall be responsible for the custody of the said assets of estate on his own or by means of entering 
into a custody agreement with an heir or another person chosen at the discretion of the notary. 
Article 1173. Management on Trust of the Estate 
If the estate incorporates assets that require management apart from preservation (an enterprise, an 
interest in the authorised (aggregate) capital of a partnership or company, securities, exclusive rights etc.) 
the notary, acting as a trustee under Article 1026 of the present Code, shall conclude a trust agreement in 
respect of such assets. 
In the case of succession by a will whereby an executor of the will is appointed, the rights of the 
trustee shall belong to the executor of the will. 
Article 1174. Reimbursement of Expenses Incurred Due to the Death of the 
Testator and Expenses Towards Preservation and Administration of the Estate 
1. The necessary expenses incurred due to the pre-death illness of the testator, decent funeral 
expenses, including the necessary expenses incurred as payment for the place of burial of the testator, 
estate preservation and administration expenses and also testamentary expenses shall be reimbursable out 
of the decedent's estate within the value thereof. 
2. Claims for reimbursement of the expenses specified in Item 1 of the present article may be 
presented to heirs which have accepted their gifts and, before the acceptance of a gift, to the executor of 
the will or satisfied on the account of the estate. 
Such expenses shall be reimbursed before the repayment of debts to creditors of the testator and 
within the limits of value of the portion of the estate taken by each of the heirs. In such cases expenses 
incurred in connection with the testator's illness and funeral shall rank as first category, estate 
preservation and administration expenses as second category and testamentary expenses as third category. 
Federal Law No. 156-FZ of December 2, 2004 amended Item 3 of Article 1174 of Part Three of the 
Civil Code of the Russian Federation 
See the previous text of the Item 
3. Any amounts of money owned by the testator, including bank deposits and accounts, may be used 
to bear the testator's decent funeral expenses. 
The banks having in their deposits or accounts the testators' amounts of money shall provide them 
on the notary's decision to the person specified in the decision for the purpose of making payment 
towards these expenses. 
An heir to whom amounts of money in the testator's deposit or any other bank account have been 
left by will, in particular in cases when they were left by means of testamentary instructions in a bank 
(Article 1128), shall be entitled at any time before the expiry of six months after the opening of the 
inheritance to receive from the testator's deposit or bank account amounts of money required for the 
funeral of the testator. 
The amount of money handed out by the bank in keeping with the present item for funeral purposes 
to an heir or a person indicated in the notary's decision shall not exceed two hundred times the minimum 
monthly wage as established by the law as of the date of application for the money. 
The rules of the present item shall be correspondingly applicable to other credit organisation entitled 
to raise citizens' funds in deposit and other accounts. 
Article 1175. Heirs' Liabilities for the Testator's Debts 
1. Heirs who have accepted their gift shall be liable together for the debts of the testator (Article 
323). 
Each of the heirs shall be liable for the testator's debts within the limits of the value of the gift 
he/she takes. 
2. An heir who has accepted his/her gift by way of hereditary transition (Article 1156) shall be liable 
for the testator's debts within the limits of the value of the gift and the gift shall not be collected for the 
debts of the heir from which he/she acquired the right to the gift. 
3. Testator's creditors are entitled to present their claims to heirs who have accepted their gifts, 
within the statutory limitation term set for relevant claims. Until the acceptance of the gift creditors' 
claims may be presented to the executor of the will or the estate may be collected to satisfy the claims. In 
the latter case a court shall suspend considering the case until the time when the estate is distributed 
among the heirs or passed to the Russian Federation by way of escheat. 
When the testator's creditors file claims, the statutory limitation term established for relevant claims 
shall not be broken, suspended or reinstated. 
Chapter 65. Succession of Specific Types of Assets 
Article 1176. Succession of Rights Connected with an Interest in Economic 
Partnerships and Companies and Production Co-Operatives 
1. The estate of a participant in a general partnership or of a general partner in a partnership in 
commendam, a participant in a limited liability company or a supplementary liability company or a 
member of a production co-operative shall include the participant's (member's) share of the share 
(authorised) capital (assets) of the respective partnership, company or co-operative. 
If for an heir to join a business partnership or production cooperative or for an heir to acquire a 
share in the authorised capital of a business company the consent of the rest of the participants in the 
partnership or company or members of the co-operative is required under the present Code, other laws or 
the foundation documents of a business partnership or company or a production co-operative, and if the 
heir has been refused such a consent he/she shall be entitled to receive from the business partnership or 
company or production co-operative the actual value of inherited share or a portion of the assets pro rata 
to the share, in the manner established for such cases by the rules of the present Code, other laws or the 
foundation documents of the legal entity. 
2. The estate of an investor in a partnership in commendam shall include his/her share in the share 
capital of the partnership. The heir to whom this share has been transferred shall become an investor in 
the partnership in commendam. 
3. The estate of a participant in a joint-stock company shall include the shares he/she owned. The 
heirs by whom these shares have been taken shall become participants in the company. 
Article 1177. Succession of Rights Relating to Participation in a Consumer Co
Operative 
1. The estate of a member of a consumer co-operative shall include his/her share. 
An heir of a member of a housing, dacha or other consumer co-operative shall be entitled to 
admittance as member of a respective co-operative. Admittance to membership in the co-operative shall 
not be refused for such an heir. 
2. The decision of the issue as to which of the heirs may be admitted to become a member of a 
consumer co-operative in the case when the testator's share has been taken by several heirs and also the 
procedure, methods and term for disbursing amounts of money payable to the heirs who have not become 
members of the co-operative or for handing out assets in kind to them in place of the money shall be 
governed by the law on consumer co-operatives and the foundation documents of the respective co
operative. 
According to Federal Law No. 97-FZ of July 11 1997 in the event of the death of a stake-holder 
his/her heirs can be admitted into the consumer co-operative, except as otherwise required by the 
constitution of the consumer co-operative  
Article 1178. Succession of an Enterprise 
An heir who, as of the date of opening an inheritance, had been registered as an individual 
entrepreneur or a commercial organisation being an heir by will shall enjoy a preferential right in the case 
of estate distribution to receive an enterprise incorporated in the estate to offset his share of inheritance 
(Article 132), given the observance of the rules of Article 1170 of the present Code. 
If neither of the heirs has the said preferential right or has not exercised such right, the enterprise 
incorporated in the estate shall not be subject to partition and shall come under the share ownership of the 
heirs in compliance with the gifts they are entitled to, except as otherwise required by an agreement of the 
heirs who have taken the estate incorporating the enterprise. 
Article 1179. Succession of Property of a Member of a Peasant (Individual) 
Farm 
1. On the death of any member of peasant (individual) farm inheritance shall be opened and 
succession shall be accomplished on general terms, given the observance of the rules of Articles 253-255 
and 257-259 of the present Code. 
2. If an heir of a deceased member of peasant (individual) farm is not himself/herself a member of 
the farm he/she shall be entitled to receive compensation pro rata to the share of the assets in share 
ownership of members of the farm he/she is entitled to. The term for disbursement of the compensation 
shall be set by agreement of the heir with the members of the farm, or if there is no agreement, by a court, 
but it shall not exceed one year after the opening of the inheritance. If there is no agreement between the 
members of the farm and the said heir to the contrary, the share of the testator in the assets shall be 
deemed equal to the shares of other members of the farm. If the heir is admitted as a member of the farm 
the said compensation shall not be payable for his/her benefit. 
3. In cases when on the death of a member of a peasant (individual) farm the farm is terminated 
(Item 1 of Article 258), in particular, in connection with the fact that the deceased had been the sole 
member of the farm and neither of his/her heirs wishes to keep running the peasant (individual) farm, the 
assets of the peasant (individual) farm shall be subject to distribution between the heirs according to the 
rules of Articles 258 and 1182 of the present Code. 
Re succession of the assets of a peasant farm see also Law of the RSFSR No. 348-1 of November 22 
1990 
Article 1180. Succession of Items with Limited Alienability 
1. Weapons, highly effective and poisonous substances, narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances 
and other things with limited alienability (Paragraph 2 of Item 2 of Article 129) that had been owned by 
the testator shall be incorporated in the estate and be inherited on the general terms established by the 
present Code. No special permission shall be required for taking a gift that includes such things. 
2. Until the time when the heir obtains a special permission for such things, measures for ensuring 
the security of the things with limited alienability shall be taken in keeping with the procedure established 
by law for this kind of property. 
If the heir is refused the said permission his/her right of ownership of such property shall be subject 
to termination in compliance with Article 238 of the present Code and proceeds from the sale of the 
property less sales expenses shall be payable to the heir. 
Article 1181. Succession of Plots of Land 
A plot of land or a right of lifetime inheritable ownership of a plot of land owned by the testator 
shall be included in the estate and inherited on the general terms established by the present Code. No 
special permission is required for taking a gift incorporating this property. 
In the case of succession of a plot of land or a right of lifetime inheritable ownership of a plot of 
land, the succession shall also include the surface layer of the plot of land (soil), isolated bodies of water, 
forest and plants located therein. 
Article 1182. Peculiarities of Partition of a Plot of Land 
1. The partition of a plot of land belonging to heirs by the right of common ownership shall be 
accomplished on the basis of the minimum size of plot of land set for the participants with a relevant 
purpose. 
According to the Land Code of the Russian Federation No. 136-FZ of October 25, 2001 the limits on 
the size of a plot of land granted to a citizen to become the citizen's property out of state-owned or 
municipally-owned land for the purpose of running a peasant's (farmer's) farm, for gardening, 
vegetable farming, cattle-breeding, summer cottage construction purposes shall be set by laws of 
Russia regions and for the purpose of running a personal auxiliary farm and for individual housing 
construction purposes by regulatory legal acts of local government bodies 
2. If the plot of land cannot be divided in the manner established by Item 1 of the present article the 
plot of land shall pass to an heir having a preferential right of obtaining this plot of land as offsetting 
his/her share of the estate. Compensation shall be provided to the other heirs in the manner established by 
Article 1170 of the present Code. 
If neither of the heirs has a preferential right of obtaining the plot of land or has exercised such 
his/her right the heirs shall possess, use and dispose of this plot of land by the right of share ownership. 
Article 1183. Succession of Outstanding Amounts of Money Granted to a 
Citizen as Means of Subsistence 
1. The right to receive the amounts of wage/salary and payments qualifying as such, pension, 
stipend, social insurance benefit, damages for harm to life or health, alimony and other amounts of money 
provided to the testator as means of subsistence which had been payable for his benefit but had not been 
received in his lifetime shall belong to the members of the testator's family who had been residing 
together with him and also his disabled dependants, irrespective of their having resided with the deceased 
or not. 
2. Claims for the disbursement of amounts of money under Item 1 of the present article shall be 
presented to the persons liable within four months after the opening of the inheritance. 
3. If there are no persons entitled under Item 1 of the present article to receive outstanding amounts 
of money that had been owing the testator or if these persons have not presented their claims for the 
disbursement of such amounts of money within the established term, these amounts of money shall be 
included in the estate and inherited on the general terms established by the present Code. 
Article 1184. Succession of Assets Granted to the Testator by the State or a 
Municipal Entity on Privileged Terms 
Means of transportation and other assets granted by the state or a municipal entity to the testator on 
privileged terms in connection with his disability or other similar circumstances shall be incorporated in 
the estate and inherited on the general terms established by the present Code. 
Article 1185. Succession of State Awards, Honour and Commemorative 
Badges 
1. The state awards bestowed on the testator and covered by the legislation on the state awards of 
the Russian Federation shall not be included in the estate. The transfer of the said awards on the death of 
the decedent to other persons shall be subject to the procedure established by the legislation on state 
awards of the Russian Federation. 
2. The state awards that had belonged to the testator which are not covered by the legislation on 
state awards of the Russian Federation, honour, commemorative and other badges, including awards and 
badges being part of collections, shall be included in the estate and inherited on the general terms 
established by the present Code. 
Section VI. International Private Law 
Chapter 66. General Provisions 
Article 1186. Determining the Law Governing Civil Legal Relations Involving 
the Participation of Foreign Persons or Civil Legal Relations Complicated by 
Another Foreign Factor 
1. The law applicable to civil legal relations involving the participation of foreign citizens or foreign 
legal entities or civil legal relations complicated by another foreign factor, in particular, in cases when an 
object of civil rights is located abroad shall be determined on the basis of international treaties of the 
Russian Federation, the present Code, other laws (Item 2 of Article 3) and usage recognised in the 
Russian Federation. 
The peculiarities of determining the law subject to application by the international commercial 
arbitration tribunal shall be established by a law on the international commercial arbitration tribunal. 
2. If under Item 1 of the present article it is impossible to determine the law subject to application 
the law of the country with which a civil legal relation complicated by a foreign factor is most closely 
related shall apply. 
3. If an international treaty of the Russian Federation contains substantive law norms governing a 
relevant relation, a definition on the basis of law of conflict norms governing the matters fully regulated 
by such substantive law norms is prohibited. 
Article 1187. Construction of Legal Terms in the Definition of Applicable Law 
1. When applicable law is being defined legal terms shall be construed in compliance with the 
Russian law, except as otherwise required by law. 
2. If, when applicable law is being defined, legal terms that require qualification are not known to 
Russian law or are known in another wording or with another content and if they cannot be defined by 
means of construction under Russian law a foreign law may be applied to the construction thereof. 
Article 1188. The Application of the Law of a Country with Several Legal 
Systems 
In cases when the law of a country where several systems of law are in effect the system of law 
defined in compliance with the law of that country shall apply. If under the law of that country it is 
impossible to define which of the systems of law is applicable the system of law to which the relation is 
the strongest shall apply. 
Article 1189. Reciprocity 
1. A foreign law shall be applicable in the Russian Federation, irrespective of the applicability of 
Russian law to relations of the kind in the relevant foreign state, except for cases when the application of 
a foreign law on reciprocal basis is required by law. 
2. Where the application of a foreign law depends on reciprocity such a reciprocity shall be deemed 
to exist unless the contrary is proven. 
Article 1190. Reverse Reference 
1. Any reference to a foreign law in compliance with the rules of the present section shall be deemed 
a reference to substantive law rather than the law of conflict of the relevant country, except for the cases 
specified in Item 2 of the present article. 
2. A reverse reference of a foreign law may be accepted in the cases of reference to the Russian law 
defining the legal status of a natural person (Articles 1195 - 1200). 
Article 1191. Establishing the Content of Foreign Law Norms 
1. Where a foreign law is applied a court shall establish the content of its norms in compliance with 
the official construction, application practices and doctrine thereof in the relevant foreign state. 
2. For the purpose of establishing the content of norms of a foreign law a court may apply in the 
established manner to the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation and other competent bodies or 
organisations in the Russian Federation and abroad for assistance and clarification or may use the services 
of experts. 
Persons being party to a case may present documents confirming the content of foreign law norms 
to which they refer to substantiate their claims or objections and provide other assistance to a court in 
establishing the content of these norms. 
As concerns claims relating to the pursuance of entrepreneurial activity by parties, the burden of 
proving the content of foreign law norms may be vested by a court in the parties. 
3. If, despite measures taken in compliance with the present articles, the content of foreign law 
norms fails to be established within a reasonable term, the Russian law shall apply. 
Article 1192. Application of Imperative Norms 
1. The regulations of the present section shall not affect the applicability of the imperative norms of 
the legislation of the Russian Federation which, due to indication in the imperative norms themselves or 
due to their special significance, in particular, for safeguarding the rights and law-protected interests of 
participants in civil law relations, regulate relevant relations, irrespective of the law that is subject to 
application. 
2. According to the rules of the present section, when the law of any country is applied a court may 
take into account imperative norms of another country closely related to the relationship if under the law 
of that country such norms are to govern relevant relations, irrespective of the law that is subject to 
application. In such cases the court shall take into account the purpose and nature of such norms and also 
the consequences of their application or non-application. 
Article 1193. Public Order Clause 
A norm of a foreign law subject to application in keeping with the rules of the present section shall 
not be applicable in exceptional cases when the consequences of its application would have obviously 
been in conflict with the fundamentals of law and order (public order) of the Russian Federation. In such 
a case a relevant norm of Russian law shall be applied if necessary. 
A refusal to apply a norm of a foreign law shall not be based exclusively on a difference of the legal, 
political or economic systems of a relevant foreign state from the legal, political or economic system of 
the Russian Federation. 
Article 1194. Retortions 
The Government of the Russian Federation may establish reciprocal limitations (retortions) on the 
proprietary and personal non-proprietary rights of citizens and legal entities of the states where special 
limitations exist on the proprietary and personal non-proprietary rights of Russian citizens and legal 
entities. 
Chapter 67. The Law Governing Determination 
of the Legal Status of Persons 
Article 1195. The Personal Law of Natural Persons 
1. The personal law of a natural person shall be the law of the country of which the person is a 
citizen. 
2. If, apart from being a Russian citizen, a person also has foreign citizenship, his/her personal law 
shall be deemed Russian law. 
3. If a foreign citizen has place of residence in Russian Federation his/her personal law shall be 
deemed Russian law. 
4. If a person has several foreign citizenships his/her personal law shall be deemed the law of the 
country in which the person has place of residence. 
5. The personal law of a person without citizenship shall be deemed the law of the country where 
he/she has place of residence. 
6. The personal law of a refugee shall be deemed the law of the country where he/she has been 
granted asylum. 
Article 1196. The Law Governing Determination of the Civil Legal Capacity 
of a Natural Person 
The civil legal capacity of a natural person shall be determined by his/her personal law. In such a 
case foreign citizens and persons without citizenship shall possess civil legal capacity in the Russian 
Federation in equal measure with Russian citizens, except for the cases established by law. 
Article 1197. The Law Governing Determination of the Civil Dispositive 
Capacity of a Natural Person 
1. The civil dispositive capacity of a natural person shall be determined by his/her personal law. 
2. A natural person who does not have civil dispositive capacity according to his/her personal law 
shall have no right to refer to his/her lacking dispositive capacity if he/she has dispositive capacity at the 
place where the deal was made, except for the cases in which the other party knew or was obviously 
supposed to know of the lack of dispositive capacity. 
3. The recognition of a natural person in the Russian Federation as having no dispositive capacity or 
as having a limited dispositive capacity shall be governed by Russian law. 
Article 1198. The Law Governing Determination of the Rights of a Natural 
Person to a Name 
Natural person's rights to a name, the use and protection of a name shall be determined by his/her 
personal law, except as otherwise required by the present Code or other laws. 
Article 1199. The Law Governing Tutorship and Guardianship 
1. Tutorship and guardianship over minors, adults having no dispositive capacity or having a limited 
dispositive capacity shall be appointed and terminated according to the personal law of the person over 
which it is appointed or terminated. 
2. The tutor's (guardian's) duty to accept tutorship (guardianship) shall be determined according to 
the personal law of the person who is appointed a tutor (guardian). 
3. Relations between a tutor (guardian) and a person under his/her tutorship (guardianship) shall be 
determined according to the law of the country whose institution has appointed the tutor (guardian). 
However, when a person under tutorship (guardianship) has place of residence in the Russian Federation, 
Russian law shall apply if it is more favourable for such a person. 
Article 1200. The Law Governing Cases of a Natural Person's Being Declared 
Missing or Dead 
The declaration in the Russian Federation of a natural person as missing or dead shall be governed 
by Russian law. 
Article 1201. The Law Governing Determination of the Possibility for a 
Natural Person to Pursue Entrepreneurial Activity 
The natural person's right to pursue entrepreneurial activity as an individual entrepreneur, without 
the formation of a legal entity, shall be determined by the law of the country where the natural person is 
registered as an individual entrepreneur. If this rule cannot be applied due to lack of a compulsory 
registration the law of the country of the main place of business shall apply. 
Article 1202. The Personal Law of a Legal Entity 
1. The personal law of a legal entity shall be deemed the law of the country where the legal entity 
has been founded. 
2. In particular the following shall be determined on the basis of the personal law of a legal entity: 
1) an organisation's status as a legal entity; 
2) the organisational legal form of a legal entity; 
3) the standards governing the name of a legal entity; 
4) issues concerning the formation, re-organisation and liquidation of a legal entity, in particular 
matters of succession; 
5) the content of the legal capacity of a legal entity; 
6) the procedure for acquisition of civil rights and assumption of civil duties by a legal entity; 
7) in-house relations, in particular, relations between a legal entity and its founders; 
8) a legal entity's capacity to be liable for its obligations. 
3. A legal entity shall not refer to a limitation on the powers of its body or representative to enter 
into a deal which is not known in the law of the country where the body or the representative has entered 
into the deal, except for cases when it is proven that the other side in the deal knew or was obviously 
supposed to know of the said limitation. 
Article 1203. The Personal Law of a Foreign Organisation Not Qualifying as a 
Legal Entity under Foreign Law 
The personal law of a foreign organisation not qualifying as a legal entity under foreign law shall be 
deemed the law of the country where this organisation was founded. 
If Russian law is applicable, the activity of such an organisation shall be accordingly subject to the 
rules of the present Code which govern the activities of legal entities, except as otherwise required by a 
law, other legal acts or the substance of the relation in question. 
Article 1204. Participation of a State in Civil Legal Relations Complicated by 
a Foreign Factor 
Civil legal relations complicated by a foreign factor as involving the participation of a state shall be 
subject to the rules of the present section on general terms, except as otherwise established by law. 
Chapter 68. The Law Governing Proprietary and Personal 
Non-Proprietary Relations 
Article 1205. General Provisions Concerning the Law Governing Rights in 
Rem 
1. The content of a right of ownership and other rights in rem relating to immovable and movable 
property, the exercise and protection thereof shall be determined according to the law of the country 
where such property is located. 
2. Property shall be classified as immovable or movable in compliance with the law of the country 
where such property is located. 
Article 1206. The Law Governing the Emergence and Termination of Rights in 
Rem 
1. The emergence and termination of a right of ownership and other rights in rem relating to 
property shall be determined by the law of the country where such property was located as of the time 
when the action was committed or another circumstance occurred which served as a ground for the 
emergence or termination of the right of ownership or other rights in rem, except as otherwise required 
under law. 
2. The emergence and termination of a right of ownership or other rights in rem relating to a deal 
concluded in respect of property en route shall be determined by the law of the country from which the 
property has been dispatched, except as otherwise required under law. 
3. The emergence of a right of ownership or other rights in rem in respect of property by virtue of 
acquisitive prescription shall be determined by the law of the country where the property was located as 
of the time of expiry of the acquisitive prescription term. 
Article 1207. The Law Governing Rights in Rem Relating to Aircraft, Vessels 
and Spacecraft 
An ownership right and other rights in rem in respect of aircraft, sea vessels, inland navigation 
vessels, space craft subject to state registration, the exercise and protection of such rights shall be subject 
to the law of the country where such aircraft, vessels and space craft are registered. 
Article 1208. The Law Governing Statute of Limitations 
The statute of limitations shall be determined by the law of the country governing a relation in 
question. 
Article 1209. The Law Governing the Form of Transaction 
1. The form of transaction shall be governed by the law of place of conclusion. However, a 
transaction concluded abroad cannot be declared null and void because of a failure to comply with the 
form, if the provisions of Russian law have been observed. 
The rules set out in Paragraph 1 of the present item shall be applicable, in particular, to the form of 
powers of attorney. 
2. The form of a foreign trade transaction in which at least one party is a Russian legal entity shall 
be governed by Russian law, irrespective of the place where the transaction was concluded. This rule 
shall be applicable, in particular, in cases when at least one of the parties to such a transaction is a natural 
person pursuing entrepreneurial activities whose personal law under Article 1195 of the present Code is 
Russian law. 
3. The form of a transaction relating to immovable property shall be governed by the law of the 
country where the property is located and in respect of an immovable property recorded in a state register 
of the Russian Federation, by Russian law. 
Article 1210. Selection of Law by the Parties to a Contract 
1. When they enter into a contract or later on the parties thereto may select by agreement between 
them select the law that will govern their rights and duties under the contract. The law so selected by the 
parties shall govern the emergence and termination of a right of ownership and other rights in rem relating 
to movable property with no prejudice for the rights of third persons. 
2. An agreement of parties as to the selection of law to be applicable shall be expressly stated or 
shall clearly ensue from the terms and conditions of the contract or the complex of circumstances of the 
case. 
3. Selection of applicable law made by parties after the conclusion of a contract shall have 
retroactive effect and it shall be deemed valid, without prejudice for the rights of third persons, beginning 
from the time when the contract was concluded. 
4. The parties to a contract may select applicable law both for the contract as a whole and for 
specific parts thereof. 
5. If it ensues from the group of circumstances of a case that were in existence as of the time of 
selection of applicable law that the contract is actually connected with only one country the parties' 
selection of the law of another country shall not affect the imperative norms of the country with which the 
contract is actually connected. 
Article 1211. The Law Governing a Contract in the Case of Lack of Parties' 
Agreement on Applicable Law 
1. Where there is no agreement of parties on applicable law, the contract shall be subject to the law 
of the country with which the contract has the closest relation. 
2. The law of the country with which a contract has the closest relation shall be deemed the law of 
the country where the party responsible for the performance under the contract of crucial significance for 
the content of the contract has its place of residence or main place of business, except as otherwise 
ensuing from the law, the terms or substance of the contract or the group of circumstances of the case in 
question. 
3. A party responsible for the performance under a contract of crucial significance for the content of 
the contract shall be a party which, in particular, is the following, except as otherwise ensuing from law, 
the terms or substance of the contract or the group of circumstances of the case in question: 
1) a seller - in a sales contract; 
2) a donor - in a donation contract; 
3) a lessor/landlord - in a lease; 
4) a lender - in a contract of gratuitous use; 
5) a contractor - in a contract; 
6) a carrier - in a carriage contract; 
7) a forwarding agent - in a forwarding contract; 
8) a lender (a creditor) - in a loan (credit) contract; 
9) a financial agent - in a case in action assignment financing contract; 
10) a bank - in a bank deposit contract and bank account contract; 
11) a custodian - in a custody contract; 
12) an insurer - in an insurance policy; 
13) an agent - in a contract of agency; 
14) a commission agent - in a contract of commission agency; 
15) an agent - in a contract of agency service; 
16) a franchisor - in a contract of franchise; 
17) a mortgagor - in a mortgage contract; 
18) a surety - in a suretyship contract; 
19) a licensor - in a licence contract. 
4. The law of the country with which the contract has the closest relation shall be as follows, except 
as otherwise ensuing from law, the terms or substance of the contract or the complex of circumstances of 
the case: 
1) for a contract of independent building contractor work and a contract of independent design and 
prospecting contractor work - the law of the country where on the whole the results stipulated by the 
contract are created; 
2) for a contract of general partnership - the law of the country where on the whole the activity of 
the partnership is pursued; 
3) for a contract concluded by auction, tender or commodity market - the law of the country where 
the auction, tender is held or the commodity market is situated. 
5. A contract that has features of various types of contract shall be subject to the law of the country 
with which this contract as a whole has the closest relation, except as otherwise ensuing from law, the 
terms or substance of the contract or the group of circumstances of the case in question. 
6. If internationally accepted trading terms are used in a contract it shall be deemed, unless there are 
directions to the contrary in the contract, that the parties have agreed on their application to their relations 
of business transaction usage designated by relevant trading terms. 
Article 1212. The Law Governing a Contract with Participation of a Consumer 
1. Selection of the law governing a contract whereto a party is a natural person using, acquiring or 
ordering or intending to use, acquire or order movable things (works, services) for personal, family, 
household or other purposes and not connected with the pursuance of entrepreneurial activity shall not 
cause deprivation of the natural person (consumer) of remedies relating to his/her rights which are 
provided by imperative norms of the law of the country where the consumer has place of residence if any 
of the below circumstances have occurred: 
1) in that country the conclusion of the contract had been preceded by an offer addressed to the 
consumer or an advertisement and the consumer has committed in the same country actions required for 
the purpose of entering into the contract; 
2) a contract partner of the consumer or a representative of such a partner has received an order from 
the consumer in that country; 
3) an order for acquisition of movable things, performance of works or provision of services has 
been made by the consumer in another country visited on the initiative of a contract partner of the 
consumer, if such an initiative was aimed at encouraging the consumer to enter into the contract. 
2. If there is no agreement of the parties as to applicable law and if there are the circumstances 
specified in Item 1 of the present article the law of the country where the consumer has place of residence 
shall govern the contract with the participation of a consumer. 
3. The rules established by Items 1 and 2 of the present article shall not be applicable to: 
1) a carriage contract; 
2) a work performance contract or a service provision contract if the work is to be performed or the 
service to be provided exclusively in a country other than the country where the consumer has place of 
residence. 
The exemptions specified in the present item shall not extend to contracts for the provision of the 
services of carriage and accommodation for a single price (irrespective of the inclusion of other services 
in the single price), in particular, tourist service contracts. 
Article 1213. The Law Governing Contracts Relating to Immovable Property 
1. Where there is no agreement of parties on applicable law in respect of immovable property, the 
law of the country with which the contract has the closest relation shall apply. The right of the country 
with which the contract has the closest relation shall be deemed the law of the country where the 
immovable property is located, except as otherwise ensuing from law, the terms or substance of the 
contract or the set of circumstances of the case in question. 
2. Contracts relating to plots of land, tracts of sub-soil, isolated bodies of water and other 
immovable property located on the territory of the Russian Federation shall be subject to Russian law. 
Article 1214. The Law Governing Contracts for the Formation of a Legal 
Entity with Foreign Interest 
A contract for the formation of a legal entity with foreign interest shall be subject to the law of the 
country in which the legal entity is to be founded. 
Article 1215. The Applicability of Law Governing a Contract 
The following shall be in particular determined by the law governing a contract in keeping with the 
rules of Articles 1210 - 1214, 1216 of the present Code: 
1) the construction of the contract; 
2) the rights and duties of the parties to the contract; 
3) performance under the contract; 
4) the consequences of a default on performance or improper performance under the contract; 
5) the termination of the contract; 
6) the consequences of invalidity of the contract. 
Articled 1216. The Law Governing Assignment of a Claim 
1. The law governing a claim assignment agreement between the initial and new creditors shall be 
determined in compliance with Items 1 and 2 of Article 1211 of the present Code. 
2. The admissibility of a claim assignment, relations between the new creditor and the debtor, the 
conditions for the claim to be presented to the debtor by the new creditor and also the issue of the debtor's 
appropriate performance under his obligation shall be determined by the law applicable to the claim being 
the subject matter of the assignment. 
Article 1217. The Law Governing Obligations Emerging from Unilateral 
Transactions 
Except as otherwise required by law, the terms or substance of the transaction or the set of 
circumstances of the case in question, obligations emerging from unilateral transactions shall be governed 
by the law of the country where the party assuming obligations under a unilateral transaction has place of 
residence or main place of business. 
The effective term of powers of attorney and the grounds for declaring it null and void shall be 
determined by the law of the country where the powers of attorney were issued. 
Article 1218. The Law Governing the Relations of Payment of Interest 
The grounds for collecting, the calculation procedure and the rate of interest on pecuniary 
obligations shall be governed by the law of the country governing a given obligation. 
Article 1219. The Law Governing Obligations Emerging as a Result of 
Infliction of Harm 
1. Obligations emerging as a result of infliction of harm shall be governed by the law of the country 
where the action or other circumstance that has served as ground for damages claim occurred. In cases 
when the action or other circumstances caused harm in another country, the law of that country may be 
applied if the person causing the harm foresaw or should have foreseen the onset of the harm in that 
country. 
2. Obligations emerging as a result of infliction of harm abroad, if the parties are citizens or legal 
entities of one and the same country, shall be governed by the law of that country. If the parties to such an 
obligation are not citizens of one and the same country but have place of residence in one and the same 
country the law of that country shall apply. 
3. After the committing of an action or onset of another circumstance that entailed infliction of harm 
the parties may come to an agreement that the obligation that has emerged as a result of infliction of the 
harm is to be governed by the law of the country of the court. 
Article 1220. Applicability of the Law Governing Obligations Emerging as a 
Result of Infliction of Harm 
The following, in particular, shall be determined on the basis of the law governing obligations 
emerging as a result of infliction of harm: 1) a person's capacity to be liable for harm inflicted; 
2) the vesting of liability for harm in a person who is not the cause of harm; 
3) grounds for liability; 
4) grounds for limitation of liability and relief from liability; 
5) the methods of compensation for harm; 
6) the scope and amount of compensation for harm. 
Article 1221. The Law Governing Liability for Harm Inflicted as a Result of 
Defects of Goods, Works or Services 
1. At the discretion of the victim, the following shall be chosen to govern a claim for compensation 
of harm inflicted as a result of defects of goods, works or services: 
1) the law of the country where the seller or manufacturer of the goods or other causer of harm has 
place of residence or main place of business; 
2) the law of the country where the victim has place of residence or main place of business; 
3) the law of the country where the works or services have been completed or the law of the country 
where the goods were acquired. 
The selection of the law at the discretion of the victim from the options set out in Sub-items 2 or 3 
of the present item may be recognised only in cases when the causer of harm fails to prove that the goods 
were brought into the given country without his consent. 
2. If the victim did not exercise his right to choose applicable law as specified in the present article 
the applicable law shall be determined in compliance with Article 1219 of the present Code. 
3. Accordingly, the rules of the present code shall be applicable to claims for compensation of harm 
inflicted as a result of unreliable or insufficient information on goods, works or services. 
Article 1222. The Law Governing Obligations Emerging as a Result of Unfair 
Competition 
Obligations emerging as a result of unfair competition shall be governed by the law of the country 
whose market has been affected by the competition, except as otherwise required by law or the substance 
of the obligation. 
Article 1223. The Law Governing Obligations Emerging as a Result of Unjust 
Gains 
1. Obligations emerging as a result of unjust gains shall be governed by the law of the country 
where the enrichment has taken place. 
The parties may come to an agreement that the law of the court is to govern such obligations. 
2. If an unjust gain occurs in connection with a legal relation that exists or is assumed to exist due to 
which property was acquired, the obligations emerging as a result of the unjust enrichment shall be 
governed by the national law that governed or could have governed this legal relation. 
Article 1224. The Law Governing Succession Relations 
1. Succession relations shall be determined by the law of the country where a testator had his last 
place of residence, except as otherwise required by the present article. 
Immovable property succession shall be governed by the law of the country where property is 
located and succession of immovable property recorded in a state register of the Russian Federation shall 
be governed by Russian law. 
2. The capacity of a person to create a will or revoke it, in particular, in relation to immovable 
property and also the form of such a will or will revocation act shall be governed by the law of the 
country where the testator had place of residence as of the time of creation of such a will or act. However, 
a will or revocation of a will shall not be declared void because the form has failed to be observed if the 
form meets the requirements of the law of the place of creation of the will or will revocation act or the 
provisions of Russian law. 
President 
of the Russian Federation  
V. Putin 
Federal Law 12022640.2 No. 45-FZ of April 16 2001 excluded the footnote to Chapter 17 from this 
Code 